An Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search Heuristic for the Pickup
and Delivery Problem with Time Windows
Stefan Ropke, David Pisinger
8th August 2005

Abstract
The pickup and delivery problem with time windows is the problem of serving a number of transportation
requests using a limited amount of vehicles. Each request involves moving a number of goods from a
pickup location to a delivery location. Our task is to construct routes that visit all locations such that
corresponding pickups and deliveries are placed on the same route and such that a pickup is performed
before the corresponding delivery. The routes must also satisfy time window and capacity constraints.
This paper presents a heuristic for the problem based on an extension of the Large Neighborhood Search
heuristic previously suggested for solving the vehicle routing problem with time windows. The proposed
heuristic is composed of a number of competing sub-heuristics which are used with a frequency corresponding to their historic performance. This general framework is denoted Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search.
The heuristic is tested on more than 350 benchmark instances with up to 500 requests. It is able to
improve the best known solutions from the literature for more than 50% of the problems.
The computational experiments indicate that it is advantageous to use several competing sub-heuristics
instead of just one. We believe that the proposed heuristic is very robust and is able to adapt to various
instance characteristics.

Keywords: Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows, Large Neighborhood Search, Simulated
Annealing, Metaheuristics

Introduction
In the considered variant of the pickup and delivery problem with time windows (PDPTW), we are given a
number of requests and vehicles. A request consists of picking up goods at one location and delivering these
goods to another location. Two time windows are assigned to each request: a pickup time window that specifies
when the goods can be picked up and a delivery time window that tells when the goods can be dropped off.
Furthermore service times are associated with each pickup and delivery. The service times indicate how long
it will take for the pickup or delivery to be performed. A vehicle is allowed to arrive at a location before the
start of the time window of the location, but the vehicle must then wait until the start of the time window
before initiating the operation. A vehicle may never arrive to a location after the end of the time window of the
location.
Each request is assigned a set of feasible vehicles. This can for example be used to model situations where
some vehicles cannot enter a certain location because of the dimensions of the vehicle.
Each vehicle have a limited capacity and it starts and ends its duty at given locations called start and end
terminals. The start and end location do not need to be the same and two vehicles can have different start and
end terminals. Furthermore each vehicle is assigned a start and end time. The start time indicates when the
vehicle must leave its start location and the end time denotes the latest allowable arrival at its end location. Note
that the vehicle leaves its depot at the specified start time even though this may introduce a waiting time at the
first location visited.
Our task is to construct valid routes for the vehicles. A route is valid if time windows and capacity constraints are obeyed along the route, each pickup is served before the corresponding delivery, corresponding

1

pickup and deliveries are served on the same route and the vehicle only serves requests it is allowed to serve.
The routes should be constructed such that they minimize the cost function to be described below.
As the number of vehicles is limited, we might encounter situations where some requests cannot be assigned
to a vehicle. These requests are placed in a virtual request bank. In a real world situation it is up to a human
operator to decide what to do with such requests. The operator might for example decide to rent extra vehicles
in order to serve the remaining requests.
The objective of the problem is to minimize a weighted sum consisting of the following three components:
1) the sum of the distance traveled by the vehicles, 2) the sum of the time spent by each vehicle. The time spent
by a vehicle is defined as its arrival time at the end terminal minus its start time (which is given a priori), 3) the
number of requests in the request bank. The three terms are weighted by the coefficients α, β and γ respectively.
Normally a high value is assigned to γ in order to serve as many requests as possible. A mathematical model is
presented in section 1 to define the problem precisely.
The problem was inspired from a real life vehicle routing problem related to transportation of raw materials
and goods between production facilities of a major Danish food manufacturer. For confidentiality reasons, we
are not able to present any data about the real life problem that motivated this research.
The problem is NP-hard as it contains the traveling salesman problem as a special case. The objective of
this paper is to develop a method for finding good but not necessarily optimal solutions to the problem described
above. The developed method should preferably be reasonably fast, robust and able to handle large problems.
Thus it seems fair to turn to heuristic methods.
The next paragraphs survey recent work on the PDPTW. Although none of the references mentioned below
consider exactly the same problem as ours, they all face the same core problem.
Nanry and Barnes [15] are among the first to present a metaheuristic for the PDPTW. Their approach is
based on a Reactive Tabu Search algorithm that combines several standard neighborhoods. In order to test
the heuristic, Nanry and Barnes create PDPTW instances from a set of standard VRPTW problems proposed
by Solomon [26]. The heuristic is tested on instances with up to 50 requests. Li and Lim [11] use a hybrid
metaheuristic to solve the problem. The heuristic combines Simulated Annealing and Tabu search. Their
method is tested on the 9 largest instances from Nanry and Barnes [15] and they consider 56 new instances based
on Solomon’s VRPTW problems [26]. Lim, Lim and Rodrigues [12] apply “Squeaky wheel” optimization and
local search to the PDPTW. Their heuristic is tested on the set of problems proposed by Li and Lim [11]. Lau
and Liang [10] also apply Tabu search to PDPTW and they describe several construction heuristics for the
problem. Special attention is given to how test problems can be constructed from VRPTW instances.
Recently, Bent and Van Hentenryck [2] proposed a heuristic for the PDPTW based on Large Neighborhood
Search. The heuristic was tested on the problems proposed by Li and Lim [11]. The heuristic by Bent and Van
Hentenryck is probably the most promising metaheuristic for the PDPTW proposed so far.
Gendreau et al. [9] consider a dynamic version of the problem. An ejection chain neighborhood is proposed
and steepest descent and Tabu search heuristics based on the ejection chain neighborhood are tested. The tabu
search is parallelized and the sequential and parallelized versions are compared.
Several column generation methods for PDPTW have been proposed. These methods both include exact
and heuristic methods. Dumas et al. [8] were the first to use column generation for solving PDPTW. They
propose a branch and bound method that is able to handle problems with up to 55 requests.
Xu et al. [29] consider a PDPTW with several extra real-life constraints, including multiple time windows, compatibility constraints and maximum driving time restrictions. The problem is solved using a column
generation heuristic. The paper considers problem instances with up to 500 requests.
Sigurd et al. [24] solve a PDPTW problem related to transportation of livestock. This introduces some extra
constraints, such as precedence relations among the requests, meaning that some requests must be served before
others in order to avoid the spread of diseases. The problem is solved to optimality using column generation.
The largest problems solved contain more than 200 requests.
A recent survey of pickup and delivery problem literature was made by Desaulniers et al. [7].
The work presented in this paper is based on the Masters Thesis of Ropke [19]. In the papers by Pisinger
and Ropke [16], [20] it is shown how the heuristic presented in this paper can be extended to solve a variety of
vehicle routing problems, for example the VRPTW, the Multi Depot Vehicle Routing Problem and the Vehicle
Routing Problem with Backhauls.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 1 define the PDPTW problem formally, Section

2

2 describes the basic solution method in a general context; Section 3 describes how the solution method has
been applied to PDPTW and extensions to the method are presented; Section 4 contains the results of the
computational tests. The computational test is focused on comparing the heuristic to existing metaheuristics
and evaluating if the refinements presented in Section 3 improve the heuristic; Section 5 concludes the paper.

1

Mathematical model

This section presents a mathematical model of the problem, it is based on the model proposed by Desaulniers
et al. [7]. The mathematical model serves as a formal description of the problem. As we solve the problem
heuristically we do not attempt to write the model on integer-linear form.
A problem instance of the pickup and delivery problem contains n requests and m vehicles. The problem is
defined on a graph, P = {1, · · · , n} is the set of pickup nodes, D = {n + 1, · · · , 2n} is the set of delivery nodes.
Request i is represented by nodes i and i + n. K is the set of all vehicles, |K| = m. One vehicle might not be able
to serve all requests, as an example a request might require that the vehicle has a freezing compartment. Ki is
the set of vehicles that are able to serve request i and Pk ⊆ P and Dk ⊆ D are the set of pickups and deliveries,
respectively, that can be served by vehicle k, thus for all i and k: k ∈ Ki ⇔ i ∈ Pk ∧ i ∈ Dk . Requests where Ki 6= K
are called special requests. Define N = P∪D and Nk = Pk ∪Dk . Let τk = 2n+k, k ∈ K and τ0k = 2n+m+k, k ∈ K
be the nodes that represents the start and end terminal, respectively, of vehicle k. The graph G = (V, A) consists
, · · · , τ0m } and the arcs A = V ×V . For each vehicle we have a subgraph
of the nodes V = N ∪ {τ1 , · · · , τm } ∪ {τ01
Gk = (Vk , Ak ), where Vk = Nk ∪ {τk } ∪ τ0k and Ak = Vk × Vk . For each edge (i, j) ∈ A we assign a distance
di j ≥ 0 and a travel time ti j ≥ 0. It is assumed that distances and times are nonnegative; di j ≥ 0,ti j ≥ 0 and that
the times satisfy the triangle inequality; ti j ≤ til + tl j for all i, j, l ∈ V . For the sake of modeling we also assume
that ti,n+i + si > 0, this makes elimination of sub tours and the pickup-before-delivery constraint easy to model.
Each node i ∈ V has a service time si and a time window [ai , bi ]. The service time represents the time needed
for loading and unloading and the time window indicates when the visit at the particular location must start; a
visit to node i can only take place between time ai and bi . A vehicle is allowed to arrive to a location before the
start of the time window but it has to wait until the start of the time window before the visit can be performed.
For each node i ∈ N, li is the amount of goods that must be loaded onto the vehicle at the particular node, li ≥ 0
for i ∈ P and li = −li−n for i ∈ D. The capacity of vehicle k ∈ K is denoted Ck .
Four types of decision variables are used in the mathematical model. xi jk , i, j ∈ V, k ∈ K is a binary variable
which is one if the edge between node i and node j is used by vehicle k and zero otherwise. Sik , i ∈ V, k ∈ K is a
nonnegative integer that indicates when vehicle k starts the service at location i, Lik , i ∈ V, k ∈ K is a nonnegative
integer that is an upper bound on the amount of goods on vehicle k after servicing node i. Sik and Lik are only
well-defined when vehicle k actually visits node i. Finally zi , i ∈ P is a binary variable that indicates if request i
is placed in the request bank. The variable is one if the request is placed in the request bank and zero otherwise.
A mathematical model is:
min α ∑

∑

k∈K (i, j)∈A



di j xi jk + β ∑ Sτ0k ,k − aτk + γ ∑ zi
k∈K

Subject to:

3

i∈P

(1)

∑ ∑ xi jk + zi = 1

∀i ∈ P

(2)

∀k ∈ K, ∀i ∈ Pk

(3)

k∈Ki j∈Nk

∑ xi jk − ∑ x j,n+i,k = 0
j∈Vk

j∈Vk

∑

xτk , j,k = 1

∀k ∈ K

(4)

∑

xi,τ0k ,k = 1

∀k ∈ K

(5)

∀k ∈ K, ∀ j ∈ Nk

(6)

∀k ∈ K, ∀(i, j) ∈ Ak

(7)

∀k ∈ K, ∀i ∈ Vk

(8)

∀k ∈ K, ∀i ∈ Pk

(9)

∀k ∈ K, ∀(i, j) ∈ Ak

(10)

∀k ∈ K, ∀i ∈ Vk

(11)

∀k ∈ K

(12)

∀k ∈ K, ∀(i, j) ∈ Ak

(13)

zi ∈ {0, 1}

∀i ∈ P

(14)

Sik ≥ 0

∀k ∈ K, ∀i ∈ Vk

(15)

Lik ≥ 0

∀k ∈ K, ∀i ∈ Vk

(16)

j∈Pk ∪{τ0k }

i∈Dk ∪{τk }

∑ xi jk − ∑ x jik = 0

i∈Vk

i∈Vk

xi jk = 1 ⇒ Sik + si + ti j ≤ S jk
ai ≤ Sik ≤ bi
Sik ≤ Sn+i,k
xi jk = 1 ⇒ Lik + l j ≤ L jk
Lik ≤ Ck
Lτk k = Lτ0k k = 0
xi jk ∈ {0, 1}

The objective function minimizes the weighted sum of the distance traveled, the sum of the time spent by
each vehicle, and the number of requests not scheduled.
Constraint (2) ensures that each pickup location is visited or that the corresponding request is placed in the
request bank. Constraint (3) ensures that the delivery location is visited if the pickup location is visited and
that the visit is performed by the same vehicle. Constraints (4) and (5) ensure that a vehicle leaves every start
terminal and a vehicle enters every end terminal. Together with constraint (6) this ensures that consecutive
paths between τk and τ0k are formed for each k ∈ K.
Constraints (7), (8) ensure that Sik is set correctly along the paths and that the time windows are obeyed.
These constraints also make sub tours impossible. Constraint (9) ensures that each pickup occur before the
corresponding delivery. Constraints (10),(11) and (12) ensure that the load variable is set correctly along the
paths and that the capacity constraints of the vehicles are respected.

2

Solution method

Local search heuristics are often built on neighborhood moves that make small changes to the current solution,
such as moving a request from one route to another or exchanging two requests as in Nanry and Barnes [15]
and Li and Lim [11]. These kind of local search heuristics are able to investigate a huge number of solutions in
a short time, but a solution is only changed very little in each iteration. It is our belief that such heuristics can
have difficulties in moving from one promising area of the solution space to another, when faced with tightly
constrained problems, even when embedded in metaheuristics.
One way of tackling this problem is by allowing the search to visit infeasible solutions by relaxing some
constraints; see e.g. Cordeau et al. [5]. We take another approach — instead of using small “standard moves”
we use very large moves that potentially can rearrange up to 30-40% of all requests in a single iteration. The
price of doing this is that the computation time needed for performing and evaluating the moves becomes much
larger compared to the smaller moves. The number of solutions evaluated by the proposed heuristic per time
unit is only a fraction of the solutions that could be evaluated by a standard heuristic. Nevertheless very good
performance is observed in the computational tests as demonstrated in Section 4.
The proposed heuristic is based on Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) introduced by Shaw [21]. The LNS
heuristic has been applied to the VRPTW with good results (see Shaw[21], [22] and Bent and Van Hentenryck
4

Algorithm 1 LNS heuristic
1 Function LNS(s ∈ {solutions}, q ∈ N )
2
solution sbest =s;
3
repeat
4
s0 = s;
5
remove q requests from s0
6
reinsert removed requests into s0 ;
7
if (f(s0 ) < f(sbest )) then
8
sbest = s0 ;
9
if accept(s0 , s) then
10
s = s0 ;
11
until stop-criterion met
12 return sbest ;

[4]). Recently the heuristic has been applied to the PDPTW as well (Bent and Van Hentenryck [2]). The LNS
heuristic itself is similar to the ruin and recreate heuristic proposed by Schrimpf et al. [23].
The pseudo-code for a minimizing LNS heuristic is shown in Algorithm 1. The pseudo-code assumes
that an initial solution s already has been found, for example by a simple construction heuristic. The second
parameter q determines the scope of the search.
Lines 5 and 6 in the algorithm are the interesting part of the heuristic. In line 5, a number of requests
are removed from the current solution s0 and in line 6 the requests are reinserted into the current solution
again. The performance and robustness of the overall heuristic is very dependent on the choice of removal
and insertion procedures. In the previously proposed LNS heuristics for VRPTW or PDPTW (see for example
Shaw [21] or Bent and Van Hentenryck [2]) near-optimal methods were used for the reinsert operation. This was
achieved using a truncated branch and bound search. In this paper we take a different approach by using simple
insertion heuristics for performing the insertions. Even though the insertion heuristics themselves usually
deliver solutions of poor quality, the quality of the LNS heuristic is very good as the bad moves that are
generated by the insertion heuristics lead to a fruitful diversification of the search process.
The rest of the code updates the so far best solution and determines if the new solution should be accepted.
A simple accept criteria would be to accept all improving solutions. Such a criteria has been used in earlier
LNS implementations (Shaw [21]). In this paper we use a simulated annealing accept criteria.
In line 11 we check if a stop criterion is met. In our implementation we stop when a certain number of
iterations has been performed.
The parameter q ∈ {0, · · · , n} determines the size of the neighborhood. If q is equal to zero then no search at
all will take place as no requests are removed. On the other hand if q is equal to n then the problem is resolved
from scratch in each iteration. In general, one can say that the larger q is, the easier it is to move around in
the solution space, but when q gets larger each application of the insertion procedure is going to be slower.
Furthermore if one uses a heuristic for inserting requests, then choosing q too large might give bad results.
The LNS local search can be seen as an example of a very large scale neighborhood search as presented by
Ahuja et al. in [1]. Ahuja et al. define very large scale neighborhoods as neighborhoods whose sizes grow exponentially as a function of the problem size, or neighborhoods that simply are too large to be searched explicitly
in practice. The LNS local search fits into the last category, as we have a large number of possibilities for
choosing the requests to remove and a large number of possible insertions. One important difference between
the proposed heuristic and most of the heuristics described in [1] is that the latter heuristics typically examine
a huge number of solutions, albeit implicitly, while the LNS heuristic proposed in this paper only examines a
relatively low number of solutions.
Instead of viewing the LNS process as a sequence of remove-insert operations, it can also be viewed as a
sequence of fix-optimize operations. In the fix operation a number of elements in the current solution are fixed.
If for example the solution is represented as a vector of variables, the fix operation could fix a number of these
variables at their current value. The optimize operation then re-optimizes the solution while respecting the
fixation performed in the previous fix-operation. This way of viewing the heuristic might help us to apply the
heuristic to problems where the remove-insert operations do not seem intuitive. In Section 3 we introduce the
5

term Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) to describe an algorithm using several large neighborhoods
in an adaptive way. A more general presentation of the ALNS framework can be found in the subsequent paper
[16].

3

LNS applied to PDPTW

This section describes how the LNS heuristic has been applied to the PDPTW. Compared to the LNS heuristic
developed for the VRPTW and PDPTW by Shaw [21], [22] and Bent and Van Hentenryck [2], [4] the heuristic
in this paper is different in several ways:
1. We are using several removal and insertion heuristics during the same search while the earlier LNS
heuristics only used one method for removal and one method for insertions. The removal heuristics
are described in Section 3.1 and the insertion heuristics are described in Section 3.2. The method for
selecting which sub-heuristic to use is described in Section 3.3. The selection mechanism is guided by
statistics gathered during the search, as described in Section 3.4. We are going to use the term Adaptive
Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) heuristic for a LNS heuristic that uses several competing removal
and insertion heuristics and chooses between using statistics gathered during the search.
2. Simple and fast heuristics are used for the insertion of requests as opposed to the more complicated
branch and bound methods proposed by Shaw [21], [22] and Bent and Van Hentenryck [2], [4].
3. The search is embedded in a simulated annealing metaheuristic where the earlier LNS heuristics used a
simple descent approach. This is described in Section 3.5.
The present section also describes how the LNS heuristic can be used in a simple algorithm designed for
minimizing the number of vehicles used to serve all requests. The vehicle minimization algorithm only works
for homogeneous fleets without an upper bound on the number of vehicles available.

3.1

Request removal

This section describes three removal heuristics. All three heuristics take a solution and an integer q as input.
The output of the heuristic is a solution where q requests have been removed. The heuristics Shaw removal and
Worst removal furthermore have a parameter p that determines the degree of randomization in the heuristic.
3.1.1

Shaw removal heuristic

This removal heuristic was proposed by Shaw in [21, 22]. In this section it is slightly modified to suit the
PDPTW. The general idea is to remove requests that are somewhat similar, as we expect it to be reasonably
easy to shuffle similar requests around and thereby create new, perhaps better solutions. If we choose to remove
requests that are very different from each other then we might not gain anything when reinserting the requests
as we might only be able to insert the requests at their original positions or in some bad positions. We define
the similarity of two requests i and j using a relatedness measure R (i, j). The lower R (i, j) is, the more related
are the two requests.
The relatedness measure used in this paper consists of four terms: a distance term, a time term, a capacity
term and a term that considers the vehicles that can be used to serve the two requests. These terms are weighted
using the weights ϕ, χ, ψ and ω respectively. The relatedness measure is given by:


R(i, j) = ϕ dA(i),A( j) + dB(i),B( j) + χ TA(i) − TA( j) + TB(i) − TB( j)
!
Ki K j

+ψ li − l j + ω 1 −
min |Ki | , K j

(17)

A(i) and B(i) denote the pickup and delivery locations of request i and Ti indicates the time when location i is
visited. di j , li and Ki are defined in Section 1. Using the decision variable Sik from Section 1, we can write Ti as
Ti = ∑k∈K ∑ j∈Vk Sik xi jk . The term weighted by ϕ measures distance, the term weighted by χ measures temporal
6

Algorithm 2 Shaw Removal
1 Function ShawRemoval(s ∈ {solutions}, q ∈ N, p ∈ R+ )
2
request : r = a randomly selected request from S;
3
set of requests : D = {r};
4
while |D| < q do
5
r = a randomly selected request from D;
6
Array : L = an array containing all request from s not in D;
7
sort L such that i < j ⇒ R (r, L[i]) < R (r, L[ j]);
8
choose a random number y from the interval[0,1);
9
D = D {L [y p |L|]};
10
end while
11 remove the requests in D from s;

Algorithm 3 Worst Removal
1 Function WorstRemoval(s ∈ {solutions}, q ∈ N, p ∈ R+ )
2
while q > 0 do
3
Array : L = All planned requests i, sorted by descending cost(i, s);
4
choose a random number y in the interval[0,1);
5
request : r = L [y p |L|];
6
remove r from solution s;
7
q = q − 1;
8
end while

connectedness, the term weighted by ψ compares capacity demand of the requests and the term weighted by
ω ensures that two requests get a high relatedness measure if only a few or no vehicles are able to serve both
requests. It is assumed that di j , Tx and li are normalized such that 0 ≤ R(i, j) ≤ 2 (ϕ + χ) + ψ + ω. This is done
by scaling di j , Tx and li such that they only take on values from [0, 1]. Notice that we cannot calculate R(i, j), if
request i or j is placed in the request bank.
The relatedness is used to remove requests in the same way as described by Shaw [21]. The procedure for
removing requests is shown in pseudo code in Algorithm 2. The procedure initially chooses a random request
to remove and in the subsequent iterations it chooses requests that are similar to the already removed requests.
A determinism parameter p ≥ 1 introduces some randomness in the selection of the requests (a low value of p
corresponds to much randomness).
Notice that the sorting in line 7 can be avoided in an actual implementation of the algorithm, as it is sufficient
to use a linear time selection algorithm [6] in line 9.
3.1.2

Random removal

The random removal algorithm simply selects q requests at random and removes them from the solution. The
random removal heuristic can be seen as a special case of the Shaw removal heuristic with p = 1. We have
implemented a separate random removal heuristic though, as it obviously can be implemented to run faster than
the Shaw removal heuristic.
3.1.3

Worst removal

Given a request i served by some vehicle in a solution s we define the cost of the request as cost(i, s) =
f (s) − f−i (s) where f−i (s) is the cost of the solution without request i (the request is not moved to the request
bank, but removed completely). It seems reasonable to try to remove requests with high cost and inserting them
at another place in the solution to obtain a better solution value, therefore we propose a removal heuristic that
removes requests with high cost(i, s).
The worst removal heuristic is shown in pseudo-code in Algorithm 3. It reuses some of the ideas from
Section 3.1.1.
7

Notice that the removal is randomized, with the degree of randomization controlled by the parameter p like
in Section 3.1.1. This is done to avoid situations where the same requests are removed over and over again.
One can say that the Shaw removal heuristic and the worst removal heuristic belong to two different classes
of removal heuristics. The Shaw heuristic is biased towards selecting requests that “easily” can be exchanged,
while the worst-removal selects the requests that appear to be placed in the wrong position in the solution.

3.2

Inserting requests

Insertion heuristics for vehicle routing problems are typically divided into two categories: sequential and parallel insertion heuristics. The difference between the two classes is that sequential heuristics build one route
at a time while parallel heuristics construct several routes at the same time. Parallel and sequential insertion
heuristics are discussed in further detail in [17]. The heuristics presented in this paper are all parallel. The
reader should observe that the insertion heuristic proposed here will be used in a setting where they are given a
number of partial routes and a number of requests to insert — they seldom build the solution from scratch.
3.2.1

Basic greedy heuristic

The basic greedy heuristic is a simple construction heuristic. It performs at most n iterations as it inserts one
request in each iteration. Let ∆ fi,k denote the change in objective value incurred by inserting request i into route
k at the position that increases the objective value the least. If we cannot insert request i in route k, then we set
∆ fi,k = ∞ . We then define ci as ci = mink∈K {∆ fi,k }. In other words, ci is the “cost” of inserting request i at
its best position overall. We denote this position by the minimum cost position. Finally we choose the request i
that minimizes
min ci
(18)
i ∈U
and insert it at its minimum cost position. U is the set of unplanned requests. This process continues until all
requests have been inserted or no more requests can be inserted.
Observe that in each iteration we only change one route (the one we inserted into), and we do not have to
recalculate insertion costs in all the other routes. This property is used in the concrete implementation to speed
up the insertion heuristics.
An obvious problem with this heuristic is that it often postpones the placement of “hard” requests (requests
which are expensive to insert, that is requests with large ci ) to the last iterations where we do not have many
opportunities for inserting the requests as many of the routes are “full”. The heuristic presented in the next
section tries to circumvent this problem.
3.2.2

Regret heuristics

The regret heuristic tries to improve upon the basic greedy heuristic by incorporating a kind of look ahead
information when selecting the request to insert. Let xik ∈ {1, ..., m} be a variable that indicates the route
for which request i has the k’th lowest insertion cost, that is ∆ fi,xik ≤ ∆ fi,xik0 for k ≤ k0 . Using this notation
we can express ci from Section 3.2.1 as ci = ∆ fi,xi1 . In the regret heuristic we define a regret value c∗i as
c∗i = ∆ fi,xi2 − ∆ fi,xi1 . In other words, the regret value is the difference in the cost of inserting the request in its
best route and its second best route. In each iteration the regret heuristic chooses to insert the request i that
maximizes
max c∗i
i ∈U
The request is inserted at its minimum cost position. Ties are broken by selecting the insertion with lowest cost.
Informally speaking, we choose the insertion that we will regret most if it is not done now.
The heuristic can be extended in a natural way to define a class of regret heuristics: the regret-k heuristic is
the construction heuristic that in each construction step chooses to insert the request i that maximizes:
 k

max
∑ j=1 ∆ fi,xi j − ∆ fi,xi1
(19)
i ∈U

8

If some requests cannot be inserted in at least m − k + 1 routes, then the request that can be inserted in the
fewest number of routes (but still can be inserted in at least one route) is inserted. Ties are broken by selecting
the request with best insertion cost. The request is inserted at its minimum cost position. The regret heuristic
presented at the start of this section is a regret-2 heuristic and the basic insertion heuristic from Section 3.2.1 is
a regret-1 heuristic because of the tie-breaking rules. Informally speaking, heuristics with k > 2 investigate the
cost of inserting a request on the k best routes and insert the request whose cost difference between inserting it
into the best route and the k − 1 best routes is largest. Compared to a regret-2 heuristic, regret heuristics with
large values of k discover earlier that the possibilities for inserting a request become limited.
Regret heuristics have been used by Potvin and Rousseau [17] for the VRPTW. The heuristic in their paper
can be categorized as a regret-k heuristic with k = m, as all routes are considered in an expression similar to
(19). The authors do not use the change in the objective value for evaluating the cost of an insertion, but use a
special cost function. Regret heuristics can also be used for combinatorial optimization problems outside the
vehicle routing domain, an example of an application to the Generalized Assignment Problem was described
by Martello and Toth [13].
As in the previous section we use the fact that we only change one route in each iteration to speed up the
regret heuristic.

3.3

Choosing a removal and an insertion heuristic

In Section 3.1 we defined three removal heuristics (shaw, random and worst removal), and in Section 3.2 we
defined a class of insertion heuristics (basic insertion, regret-2, regret-3, etc.). One could select one
removal and one insertion heuristic and use these throughout the search, but in this paper we propose to use all
heuristics. The reason for doing this is that for example the regret-2 heuristic may be well suited for one type
of instance while the regret-4 heuristic may be the best suited heuristic for another type of instance. We believe
that alternating between the different removal and insertion heuristics gives us a more robust heuristic overall.
In order to select the heuristic to use, we assign weights to the different heuristics and use a roulette wheel
selection principle. If we have k heuristics with weights wi , i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , k}, we select heuristic j with probability
wj
(20)
k
∑i=1 wi
Notice that the insertion heuristic is selected independently of the removal heuristic (and vice versa). It is
possible to set these weights by hand, but it can be a quite involved process if many removal and insertion
heuristics are used. Instead an adaptive weight adjusting algorithm is proposed in Section 3.4.

3.4

Adaptive weight adjustment

This section describes how the weights w j introduced in Section 3.3 can be automatically adjusted using statistics from earlier iterations.
The basic idea is to keep track of a score for each heuristic, which measures how well the heuristic has
performed recently. A high score corresponds to a successful heuristic. The entire search is divided into a
number of segments. A segment is a number of iterations of the ALNS heuristic; here we define a segment as
100 iterations. The score of all heuristics is set to zero at the start of each segment. The score of a heuristic is
increased by either σ1 , σ2 or σ3 in the following situations:
Parameter
σ1
σ2
σ3

Description
The last remove-insert operation resulted in a new global best solution.
The last remove-insert operation resulted in a solution that has not been accepted before. The cost of the new solution is better than the cost of current
solution.
The last remove-insert operation resulted in a solution that has not been accepted before. The cost of the new solution is worse than the cost of current
solution, but the solution was accepted.

9

The case for σ1 is clear: if a heuristic is able to find a new overall best solution, then it has done well.
Similarly if a heuristic has been able to find a solution that has not been visited before and it is accepted by the
accept criteria in the ALNS search then the heuristic has been successful as it has brought the search forward.
It seems sensible to distinguish between the two situations corresponding to parameters σ2 and σ3 because we
prefer heuristics that can improve the solution, but we are also interested in heuristics that can diversify the
search and these are rewarded by σ3 . It is important to note that we only reward unvisited solutions. This is to
encourage heuristics that are able to explore new parts of the solution space. We keep track of visited solutions
by assigning a hash key to each solution and storing the key in a hash table.
In each iteration we apply two heuristics: a removal heuristic and an insertion heuristic. The scores for both
heuristics are updated by the same amount as we can not tell whether it was the removal or the insertion that
was the reason for the “success”.
At the end of each segment we calculate new weights using the recorded scores. Let wi j be the weight of
heuristic i used in segment j as the weight used in formula (20). In the first segment we weight all heuristics
equally. After we have finished segment j we calculate the weight for all heuristics i to be used in segment
j + 1 as follows:
πi
wi, j+1 = wi j (1 − r) + r
θi
πi is the score of heuristic i obtained during the last segment and θi is the number of times we have attempted
to use heuristic i during the last segment. The reaction factor r controls how quickly the weight adjustment
algorithm reacts to changes in the effectiveness of the heuristics. If r is zero then we do not use the scores at
all and stick to the initial weights. If r is set to one then we let the score obtained in the last segment decide the
weight.
Figure 1 shows an example of how the weights of the three removal heuristics progress over time for a
certain problem instance. The plots are decreasing because of the simulated annealing acceptance criteria to
be described in the next section. Towards the end of the search we only accept good moves and therefore it is
harder for the heuristic to get high scores.

3.5

Acceptance and stopping criteria

As described in Section 2 a simple acceptance criteria would be to only accept solutions that are better than
the current solution. This would give us a descent heuristic like the one proposed by Shaw [21]. However,
such a heuristic has a tendency to get trapped in a local minimum so it seems sensible to, on occasion, accept
solutions that are worse than the current solution. To do this, we use the acceptance criteria from simulated
f (s0 )− f (s)

where T > 0
annealing. That is, we accept a solution s0 given the current solution s with probability e− T
is the temperature.
The temperature starts out at Tstart and is decreased every iteration using the expression T = T · c, where
0 < c < 1 is the cooling rate. A good choice of Tstart is dependent on the problem instance at hand, so instead
of specifying Tstart as a parameter we calculate Tstart by inspecting our initial solution. First we calculate the
cost z0 of this solution using a modified objective function. In the modified objective function, γ (cost of having
requests in the request bank) is set to zero. The start temperature is now set such that a solution that is w
percent worse than the current solution is accepted with probability 0.5. The reason for setting γ to zero is that
this parameter typically is large and could cause us to set the starting temperature to a too large number if the
initial solution had some requests in the request bank. Now w is a parameter that has to be set. We denote this
parameter the start temperature control parameter.
The algorithm stops when a specified number of LNS iterations have passed.

3.6

Applying noise to the objective function

As the proposed insertion heuristics are quite myopic, we believe that it is worthwhile to randomize the insertion
heuristics such that they do not always make the move that seems best locally. This is achieved by adding a
noise term to the objective function. Every time we calculate the cost C of an insertion of a request into a route,
we also calculate a random number noise in the interval [−maxN, maxN] and calculate the modified insertion
costs C0 = max {0,C + noise}. At each iteration we decide if we should use C or C0 to determine the insertions

10

7
Worst removal
Random removal
Shaw removeal
6

weight

5

4

3

2

1

0
0

5000

10000

15000

20000

25000

iteration
Figure 1: The figure shows an example of how the weights for the three removal heuristics progressed during one
application of the heuristic. The iteration number is shown along the x-axis and the weight is shown along the y-axis. The
graph illustrates that for the particular problem, the random removal and the Shaw removal heuristics perform virtually
equally well, while the worst heuristic performs worst. Consequently the worst heuristic is not used as often as the two
other heuristics.
to perform. This decision is taken by the adaptive mechanism described earlier by keeping track of how often
the noise applied insertions and the “clean” insertions are successful.
In order to make the amount of noise related to the properties of the problem instance, we calculate maxN =
η · maxi, j∈V di j , where η is a parameter that controls the amount of noise. We have chosen to let maxN be
dependent on the distances di j as the distances are an important part of the objective in all of the problems we
consider in this paper.
It might seem superfluous to add noise to the insertion heuristics as the heuristics are used in a simulated
annealing framework that already contains randomization, however we believe that the noise applications are
important as our neighborhood is searched by means of the insertion heuristics and not randomly sampled.
Without the noise applications we do not get the full benefit of the simulated annealing metaheuristic. This
conjecture is supported by the computational experiments reported in table 3.

3.7

Minimizing the number of vehicles used

Minimization of the number of vehicles used to serve all requests is often considered as first priority in the
vehicle routing literature. The heuristic proposed so far is not able to cope with such an objective, but by
using a simple two stage algorithm that minimizes the number of vehicles in the first stage and then minimizes
a secondary objective (typically traveled distance) in the second stage, we can handle such problems. The
vehicle minimization algorithm only works for problems with a homogeneous fleet. We also assume that the
number of vehicles available is unlimited, such that constructing an initial feasible solution always can be done.
A two-stage method was also used by Bent and Van Hentenryck [4], [2], but while they used two different
neighborhoods and metaheuristics for the two stages, we use the same heuristic in both stages.
The vehicle minimization stage works as follows: first an initial feasible solution is created using a sequential insertion method that constructs one route at a time until all requests have been planned. The number of

11

vehicles used in this solution is the initial estimate on the number of vehicles necessary. Next step is to remove
one route from our feasible solution. The requests on the removed route are placed in the request bank. The
resulting problem is solved by our LNS heuristic. When the heuristic is run, a high value is assigned to γ such
that requests are moved out of the request bank if possible. If the heuristic is able to find a solution that serves
all requests, a new candidate for the minimum number of vehicles has been found. When such a solution has
been found, the LNS heuristic is immediately stopped, one more route is removed from the solution and the
process is reiterated. If the LNS heuristic terminates without finding a solution where all requests are served,
then the algorithm steps back to the last solution encountered in which all requests were served. This solution
is used as a starting solution in the second stage of the algorithm, which simply consists of applying the normal
LNS heuristic.
In order to keep the running time of the vehicle minimization stage down, this stage is only allowed to
spend Φ LNS iterations all together such that if the first application of the LNS heuristic for example spends a
iterations to find a solution where all requests are planned, then the vehicle minimization stage is only allowed
to perform Φ − a LNS iterations to minimize the number of vehicles further. Another way to keep the running
time limited is to stop the LNS heuristic when it seems unlikely that a solution exists in which all requests are
planned. In practice this is implemented by stopping the LNS heuristic if 5 or more requests are unplanned
and no improvement in the number of unplanned requests has been found in the last τ LNS iterations. In the
computational experiments Φ was set to 25000 and τ was set to 2000.

3.8

Discussion

Using several removal and insertion heuristics during the search may be seen as using local search with several
neighborhoods. To the best of our knowledge this idea has not been used in the LNS literature before. The
related Variable Neighborhood Search (VNS) was proposed by Mladenović and Hansen [14]. VNS is a metaheuristic framework using a parameterized family of neighborhoods. The metaheuristic has received quite a lot
of attention in the recent years and has provided impressive results for many problems. Where ALNS makes
use of several unrelated neighborhoods, VNS typically is based on a single neighborhood which is searched
with variable depth.
Several metaheuristics can be used at the top level of ALNS to help the heuristic escape a local minimum.
We have chosen to use simulated annealing as the ALNS heuristic already contains the random sampling element. For a further discussion of metaheuristic frameworks used in connection with ALNS see the subsequent
paper [16].
The request bank is an entity that makes sense for many real life applications. In the problems considered in
Section 4 we do not accept solutions with unscheduled requests, but the request bank allows us to visit infeasible
solutions in a transition stage, improving the overall search. The request bank is particularly important when
minimizing the number of vehicles.

4

Computational experiments

In this section we describe our computational experiments. We first introduce a set of tuning instances in
Section 4.1. In Section 4.2 we evaluate the performance of the proposed construction heuristics on the tuning
instances. In Section 4.3 we describe how the parameters of the ALNS heuristic were tuned, and in Section 4.4
we present the results obtained by the ALNS heuristic and a simpler LNS heuristics.

4.1

Tuning instances

First a set of representative tuning instances is identified. The tuning instances must have a fairly limited size as
we want to perform numerous experiments on the tuning problems and they should somehow be related to the
problems our heuristic is targeted at. In the case at hand we want to solve some standard benchmark instances
and a new set of randomly generated instances.
Our tuning set consists of 16 instances. The first four instances are LR1_2_1, LR202, LRC1_2_3, and
LRC204 from Li and Lim’s benchmark problems [11], containing between 50 and 100 requests. The number
of available vehicles was set to one more than that reported by Li and Lim to make it easier for the heuristic
to find solutions with no requests in the request bank. The last 12 instances are randomly generated instances.
12

These instances contain both single depot and multi depot problems and problems with requests that only can
be served by a subset of the vehicle fleet. All randomly generated problems contain 50 requests.

4.2

Evaluation of construction heuristics

First we examine how the simple construction heuristics from Section 3.2 perform on the tuning problems, to
see how well they work without the LNS framework. The construction heuristics regret-1, regret-2, regret3, regret-4 and regret-m have been implemented. Table 1 shows the results of the test. As the construction
heuristics are deterministic, the results were produced by applying the heuristics to each of the 16 test problems
once.
Avg. gap (%)
Fails
Time (s)

Basic greedy
40.7
3
0.02

Regret-2
30.3
3
0.02

Regret-3
26.3
3
0.02

Regret-4
26.0
2
0.02

Regret-m
27.7
0
0.03

Table 1: Performance of construction heuristics. Each column in the table corresponds to one of the construction
heuristics. These simple heuristics were not always able to construct a solution where all requests are served, hence for
each heuristic we report the number of times this happened in the fails row. The Avg. gap row shows the average relative
difference between the found solution and the best known solution. Only solutions where all requests are served are
included in the calculations of the average relative difference. The last row shows the average time (in seconds) needed
for applying the heuristic to one problem, running on a 1.5 GHz Pentium IV.
The results show that the proposed construction heuristics are very fast, but also very imprecise. Basic
greedy is the worst heuristic, while all the regret heuristics are comparable with respect to the solution quality.
Regret-m stands out though, as it is able to serve all requests in all problems. It would probably be possible to
improve the results shown in Table 1 by introducing seed requests as proposed by e.g. Solomon [26]. However
we are not going to report on such experiments in this paper. It might be surprising that these very imprecise
heuristics can be used as the foundation of a much more precise local search heuristic, but as we are going to
see in the following sections, this is indeed possible.

4.3

Parameter tuning

This part of the paper serves two purposes. First it describes how the parameters used for producing the results
in Section 4.4 were found. Next, it tries to unveil which part of the heuristic contributes most to the solution
quality.
4.3.1

Parameters

This section determines the parameters that need to be tuned. We first review the removal parameters. Shaw
removal is controlled by five parameters: ϕ, χ, ψ, ω and p, while the worst removal is controlled by one
parameter pworst . Random removal has no parameters. The insertion heuristics are parameter free when we
have chosen the regret degree.
In order to control the acceptance criteria we use two parameters, w and c. The weight adjustment algorithm
is controlled by four parameters, σ1 , σ2 , σ3 and r. Finally we have to determine a noise rate η and a parameter
ξ that controls how many requests we remove in each iteration. In each iteration, we chose a random number ρ
that satisfies 4 ≤ ρ ≤ min(100, ξn), and remove ρ requests.
We stop the search after 25000 LNS iterations as this resulted in a fair trade-off between time and quality.
4.3.2

LNS parameter tuning

Despite the large number of parameters used in the LNS heuristic, it turns out that it is relatively easy to find
a set of parameters that works well for a large range of problems. We use the following strategy for tuning the
parameters: first a fair parameter setting is produced by an ad-hoc trial-and-error phase, this parameter setting
was found while developing the heuristic. This parameter setting is improved in the second phase by allowing
13

one parameter to take a number of values, while the rest of the parameters are kept fixed. For each parameter
setting we apply the heuristic on our set of test problems five times, and the setting that shows the best average
behavior (in terms of average deviation from the best known solutions) is chosen. We now move on to the
next parameter, using the values found so far and the values from the initial tuning for the parameters that have
not been considered yet. This process continues until all parameters have been tuned. Although it would be
possible to process the parameters once again using the new set of parameters as a starting point to further
optimize the parameters, we stopped after one pass.
One of the experiments performed during the parameter tuning sought to determine the value of the parameter ξ that controls how many requests we remove and insert in each iteration. This parameter should intuitively
have a significant impact on the results our heuristic is able to produce. We tested the heuristic with ξ ranging
from 0.05 to 0.5 with a step size of 0.05. Table 2 shows the influence of ξ. When ξ is too low the heuristic
is not able to move very far in each iteration, and it has a higher chance of being trapped in one suboptimal
area of the search space. On the other hand, if ξ is large then we can easily move around in the search space,
but we are stretching the capabilities of our insertion heuristics. The insertion heuristics work fairly well when
they must insert a limited number of requests into a partial solution, but they cannot build a good solution from
scratch as seen in Section 4.2. The results in Table 2 shows that ξ = 0.4 is a good choice. One must notice that
the heuristic gets slower when ξ increases because the removals and insertions take longer when more requests
are involved, thus the comparison in Table 2 is not completely fair.
ξ
Avg. gap (%)

0.05
1.75

0.1
1.65

0.15
1.21

0.2
0.97

0.25
0.81

0.3
0.71

0.35
0.81

0.4
0.49

0.45
0.57

0.5
0.57

Table 2: Parameter ξ vs. solution quality. The first row shows the values of the parameter ξ that were tested and the
second row shows the gap between the average solution obtained and the best solutions produced in the experiment.

The complete parameter tuning resulted in the following parameter vector (ϕ, χ, ψ, ω, p, pworst , w, c, σ1 ,
σ2 ,σ3 , r, η, ξ) = (9, 3, 2, 5, 6, 3, 0.05, 0.99975, 33, 9, 13, 0.1, 0.025, 0.4). Our experiments also indicated
that it was possible to improve the performance of the vehicle minimization algorithm by setting (w, c) = (0.35,
0.9999) while searching for solutions that serve all requests. This corresponds to a higher start temperature and
a slower cooling rate. This indicates that more diversification is needed when trying to minimize the number of
vehicles, compared to the situation where one just minimizes the traveled distance.
In order to tune the parameters we start from an initial guess, and then tune one parameter at a time. When
all parameters are tuned, the process is repeated. In this way the calibration order plays a minor order. Although
the parameter tuning is quite time consuming, it could easily be automated. In our subsequent papers [20, 16]
where 11 variants of the vehicle routing problem are solved using the heuristic proposed in this paper we only
re-tuned a few parameters and obtained very convincing results, so it seems that a complete tuning of the
parameters only needs to be done once.
4.3.3

LNS configurations

This section evaluates how the different removal and insertion heuristics behave when used in a LNS heuristic.
In most of the test cases a simple LNS heuristic was used that only involved one removal heuristic and one
insertion heuristic. Table 3 shows a summary of this experiment.
The first six experiments aim at determining the influence of the removal heuristic. We see that Shaw
removal performs best, the worst removal heuristic is second, and the random removal heuristic gives the worst
performance. This is reassuring as it shows that the two slightly more complicated removal heuristics actually
are better than the simplest removal heuristic. These results also illustrate that the removal heuristic can have
a rather large impact on the solution quality obtained, thus experimenting with other removal heuristics would
be interesting and could prove beneficial.
The next eight experiments show the performance of the insertion heuristics. Here we have chosen Shaw
removal as removal heuristic because it performed best in the previous experiments. In these experiments
we see that all insertion heuristics perform quite well, and they are quite hard to distinguish from each other.
Regret-3 and Regret-4 coupled with noise addition are slightly better than the rest though. An observation that
applies to all experiments is that application of noise seems to help the heuristic. It is interesting to note that the
14

Conf.

LNS

ALNS

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

Shaw

Rand

Worst
•
•

Reg-1

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Reg-2
•
•
•
•
•
•

Reg-3

Reg-4

Reg-m

•
•
•

•
•

•
•
•

•
•
•

•

•

•

Noise

•

•

•

•
•
•
•

•
•

Avg. gap (%)
2.7
2.6
5.4
3.2
2.0
1.6
2.2
1.6
1.8
1.3
2.0
1.3
1.8
1.7
1.3

Table 3: Simple LNS heuristics compared to the full adaptive LNS with dynamic weight adjustment. The first column
shows if the configuration must be considered as an LNS or an ALNS heuristic. The second column is the configuration
number, columns three to five indicate which removal heuristics were used. Columns six to ten indicate which insertion
heuristics were used. Column eleven states if noise was added to the objective function during insertion of requests (in
this case noise was added to the objective function in 50% of the insertions for the simple configurations 1-14 while
in configuration 15 the number of noise-insertions was controlled by the adaptive method). Column twelve shows the
average performance of the different heuristics. As an example, in configuration four we used random removal together
with the regret-2 insertion heuristic and we applied noise to the objective value. This resulted in a set of solutions whose
objective values on average were 3.2% above the best solutions found during the whole experiment.
basic insertion heuristic nearly performs as well as the regret heuristics when used in a LNS framework. This
is surprising seen in the light of Table 1 where the basic insertion heuristic performed particularly badly. This
observation may indicate that the LNS method is relatively robust with respect to the insertion method used.
The last row of the table shows the performance of ALNS. As one can see, it is on par with the two best
simple approaches, but not better, which at first may seem disappointing. The results show though, that the
adaptive mechanism is able to find a sensible set of weights, and it is our hypothesis that the ALNS heuristic
is more robust than the simpler LNS heuristics. That is, the simple configuration may fail to produce good
solutions on other types of problems, while the ALNS heuristic continues to perform well. One of the purposes
of the experiments in Section 4.4 is to confirm or disprove this hypothesis.

4.4

Results

This section provides computational experiments conducted to test the performance of the heuristic. There are
three major objectives for this section:
1. To compare the ALNS heuristic to a simple LNS heuristic that only contains one removal and one insertion heuristic.
2. To determine if certain problem properties influence the (A)LNS heuristics ability to find good solutions.
3. To compare the ALNS heuristic with state-of-the-art PDPTW heuristics from the literature.
In order to clarify if the ALNS heuristic is worthwhile compared to a simpler LNS heuristic we are going to
show results for both the ALNS heuristic and the best simple LNS heuristic from Table 3. Configuration 12
was chosen as representative for the simple LNS heuristics as it performed slightly better than configuration
10. In the following sections we refer to the full and simple LNS heuristic as ALNS and LNS respectively.
All experiments were performed on a 1.5 GHz Pentium IV PC with 256 MB internal memory, running
Linux. The implemented algorithm measures travel times and distances using double precision floating point
numbers. The parameter setting found in Section 4.3.2 was used in all experiments unless otherwise stated.
15

4.4.1

Data sets

As the model considered in this paper is quite complicated, it is hard to find any benchmark instances that
consider exactly the same model and objective function. The benchmark instances that come closest to the
model considered in this paper are the instances constructed by Nanry and Barnes [15] and the instances constructed by Li and Lim [11]. Both data sets are single depot pickup and delivery problems with time windows,
constructed from VRPTW problems. We are only reporting results on the data set proposed by Li and Lim, as
the Nanry and Barnes instances are easy to solve due to their size.
The problem considered by Li and Lim were simpler than the one considered in this paper as: 1) it did not
contain multiple depots; 2) all requests must be served; 3) all vehicles were assumed to be able to serve all
requests. When solving the Li and Lim instances using the ALNS heuristic we set α to one and β to zero in our
objective function. In section 4.5 we minimize the number of vehicles as first priority while we in section 4.4.2
only minimize the distance driven.
In order to test all aspects of the model proposed in this paper, we also introduce some new, randomly
generated instances. These instances are described in section 4.4.3.
4.4.2

Comparing ALNS and LNS using the Li & Lim instances

This section compares the ALNS and LNS heuristics using the benchmark instances proposed by Li and Lim
[11]. The data set contains 354 instances with between 100 and 1000 locations. The data set can be downloaded
from [25].
In this section we use the distance driven as our objective even though vehicle minimization is the standard
primary objective for these instances. The reason for this decision is that distance minimization makes comparison of the heuristics easier and distance minimization is the original objective of the proposed heuristic. The
number of vehicles available for serving the requests is set to the minimum values reported by Li and Lim in
[11] and on their web page which unfortunately no longer is on-line.
The heuristics were applied 10 times to each instance with 400 or less locations and 5 times to each instance
with more than 400 locations. The experiments are summarized in Table 4.

#locations
100
200
400
600
800
1000

#problems
56
60
60
60
60
58

Best known solutions
ALNS
LNS
52
50
49
15
52
6
54
5
46
5
47
4

Avg. gap (%)
ALNS LNS
0.19 0.50
0.72 1.41
2.36 4.29
0.93 3.20
1.73 3.27
2.26 4.22

Average time (s)
ALNS
LNS
49
55
305
314
585
752
1069
1470
2025
3051
2916
5252

Fails
ALNS LNS
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
1

Table 4: Summary of results obtained on Li and Lim instances [11]. The first column gives the problem size; the next
column indicates the number of problems in the data set of the particular size. The rest of the table consists of four major
columns, each divided into two sub columns, one for the ALNS and one for LNS. The column Best known solutions
indicates for how many problems the best known solution was identified. The best known solution is either the solution
reported by Li and Lim or the best solution identified by the (A)LNS heuristics depending on which is best. The next
column indicates how far the average solution is from best known solution. This number is averaged over all problems of
a particular size. The next column shows how long the heuristic on average spends to solve a problem. The last column
shows the number of times the heuristic failed to find a solution where all request are served by the given number of
vehicles in all the attempts to solve a particular problem.
The results show that the ALNS heuristic on all four terms performs better than the LNS heuristic. One also
notices that the ALNS heuristic becomes even more attractive as the problem size increases. It may seem odd
that the LNS heuristic spends more time compared to the ALNS heuristic when they both perform the same
number of LNS iterations. The reason for this behavior is that the Shaw removal heuristic used by the LNS
heuristic is more time consuming compared to the two other removal heuristics.

16

4.4.3

New instances

This section provides results on randomly generated PDPTW instances that contain features of the model that
were not used in the Li and Lim benchmark problems considered in Section 4.4.2. These features are: multiple
depots, routes with different start and end terminals and special requests that only can be served by a certain
subset of the vehicles. When solving these instances we set α = β = 1 in the objective function so that distance
and time are weighted equally in the objective function. We do not perform vehicle minimization as the vehicles
are inhomogeneous.
Three types of geographical distributions of requests are considered: problems with locations distributed
uniformly in the plane, problems with locations distributed in 10 clusters and problems with 50% of the locations are put in 10 clusters and 50% of the locations distributed uniformly. These three types of problems were
inspired by Solomon’s VRPTW benchmark problems [26], and the problems are similar to the R, the C and the
RC Solomon problems respectively. We consider problems with 50, 100, 250 and 500 requests, all problems
are multi depot problems. For each problem size we generated 12 problems as we tried every combination of
the three problem features shown below:
• Route type: 1) A route starts and ends at the same location, 2) a route starts and ends at different locations.
• Request type: 1) All requests are normal requests, 2) 50% of the requests are special requests. The
special requests can only be served by a subset of the vehicles. In the test problems each special request
could only be served by between 30% to 60% of the vehicles.
• Geographical distributions: 1) Uniform, 2) Clustered, 3) Semi-clustered.
The instances can be downloaded from www.diku.dk/~sropke. The heuristics were tested by applying them to
each of the 48 problems 10 times. Table 5 shows a summary of the results found. In the table we list for how
many problems the two heuristics find the best known solution. The best known solution is simply the best
solution found throughout this experiment.
We observe the same tendencies as in Table 4; ALNS is still superior to LNS, but one notices that the gap
in solution quality between the two methods are smaller for this set of instances while the difference in running
time is larger compared to the results on the Li and Lim instances. One also notices that it seems harder to solve
small instances of this problem class compared to the Li and Lim instances.

#requests
50
100
250
500
Sum:

#problems
12
12
12
12
48

Best known solutions
ALNS
LNS
8
5
11
1
7
5
9
3
35
14

Avg. gap (%)
ALNS LNS
1.44 1.86
1.54 2.18
1.39 1.62
1.18 1.32
5.55 6.98

Average time (s)
ALNS
LNS
23
34
83
142
577
1274
3805
8146
4488
9596

Table 5: Summary of results obtained on new instances. The captions of the table should be interpreted as in Table 4.
The last row sums each column. Notice that the size of the problems in this table is given as number of requests and not
the number of locations.
Table 6 summarizes how the problem features influence the average solution quality. These results show that
the clustered problems are the hardest to solve, while the uniformly distributed instances are the easiest. The
results also indicate that special requests make the problem slightly harder to solve. The route type experiments
compare the situation where routes start and end at the same location (the typical situation considered in the
literature) to the situation where each route starts and ends at different locations. Here we expect the last case to
be the easiest to solve, as we by having different start and end positions for our routes, gain information about
the area the route most likely should cover. The results in Table 6 confirm these expectations.
In addition to investigate the question of how the model features influence the average solution quality
obtained by the heuristics we also want to know if the presence of some features could make LNS behave better
than ALNS. For the considered features the answer is negative.
17

Feature
Distribution: Uniform
Distribution: Clustered
Distribution: Semi-clustered
Normal Requests
Special Requests
Start of route = end of route
Start of route 6= end of route

ALNS
1.04%
1.89%
1.23%
1.24%
1.54%
1.59%
1.19%

LNS
1.50%
2.09%
1.64%
1.47%
2.02%
2.04%
1.45%

Table 6: Summary of the influence of certain problem features on the heuristic solutions. The two columns correspond
to the two heuristic configurations. Each row shows the average solution quality for each feature. The average solution
quality is defined as the average of the average gap for all instances
feature. To be more precise, the
 with a specific
0
10 c(i, j,h)−c (i)
1
1
solution quality is calculated using the formula: q(h) = |F| ∑i∈F 10 ∑ j=1
where F is the set of instances
c0 (i)
with a specific feature, c0 (i) is the cost of the best known solution to instance i and c(i, j, h) is the cost obtained in the jth
experiment on instance i using heuristic h.

4.5

Comparison to existing heuristics

This section compares the ALNS heuristics to existing heuristics for the PDPTW. The comparison is performed
using the benchmark instances proposed by Li and Lim [11] that also were used in Section 4.4.2. When PDPTW
problems have been solved in the literature, the primary objective has been to minimize the number of vehicles
used while the secondary objective has been to minimize the traveled distance. For this purpose we use the
vehicle minimization algorithm described in Section 3.7. The ALNS heuristic was applied 10 times to each
instance with 200 or less locations and 5 times to each instance with more than 200 locations. The experiments
are summarized in Tables 7, 8 and 9. It should be noted that it was necessary to decrease the w parameter and
increase the c parameter when the instances with 1000 locations were solved in order to get reasonable solution
quality. Apart from that, the same parameter setting has been used for all instances.
In the literature, four heuristics have been applied to the benchmark problems: the heuristic by Li and
Lim [11], the heuristic by Bent and Van Hentenryck [2] and two commercial heuristics; a heuristic developed
by SINTEF and a heuristic developed by TetraSoft A/S. Detailed results for the two last heuristics are not
available but some results obtained using these heuristics can be found on a web page maintained by SINTEF
[25]. The heuristic that has obtained the best overall solution quality so far is probably the one by Bent and
Van Hentenryck [2] (shortened BH heuristic in the following), therefore the ALNS heuristic is compared to
this heuristic in Table 7. The complete results from the BH heuristic can be found in [3]. The results given
for the BH heuristic are the best obtained among 10 experiments (though for the 100 location instances only 5
experiments were performed). The Avg. TTB column shows the average time needed for the BH heuristic to
obtain its best solution. For the ALNS heuristic we only list the time used in total as this heuristic - because of
its simulated annealing component, the heuristic usually finds its best solution towards the end of the search.
The BH heuristic was tested on a 1.2 GHz Athlon processor and the running times of the two heuristics should
therefore be comparable (we believe that the Athlon processor is at most 20% slower than our computer).
The results show that the ALNS heuristic overall dominates the BH heuristic, especially as the problem sizes
increase. It is also clear that the ALNS heuristic is able to improve considerably on the previously best known
solutions and that the vehicle minimization algorithm works very well despite its simplicity. The last two
columns in Table 7 summarize the best results obtained using several experiments with different parameter
settings, which show that the results obtained by ALNS actually can be improved even further.
Table 8 compares the results obtained by ALNS with the best known solutions from the literature. It can be
seen that ALNS improves more than half of the solutions and achieves a solution that is at least as good as the
previously best known solution for 80% of the problems.
The two afore mentioned tables only dealt with the best solutions found by the ALNS heuristic. Table
9 shows the average solution quality obtained by the heuristic. These numbers can be compared to those in
Table 7. It is worth noticing that the average solution sometimes have a lower distance than the “best of 10
or 5” solution in table 7, this is the case in the last row. This is possible because the heuristic finds solutions
that use more than the minimum number of vehicles and this usually makes solutions with shorter distances

18

Best known 2003
#locations

#veh.

100
200

BH best

Dist

#veh.

Dist

402

58060

402

58062

615

178380

614

180358

400

1183

421215

1188

423636

600

1699

873850

1718

879940

800

2213

1492200

2245

1000

2698

2195755

2759

ALNS best of 10 or 5

Avg. TTB

Avg. time

#veh.

68

3900

402

772

3900

606

2581

6000

1158

3376

6000

1679

1480767

5878

8100

2225190

6174

8100

Dist

ALNS best

Avg. time

#veh.

Dist

58060

66

402

56060

180931

264

606

180419

422201

881

1157

420396

863442

2221

1664

860898

2208

1432078

3918

2181

1423063

2652

2137034

5370

2646

2122922

Table 7: This table compares the ALNS heuristic to existing heuristics using the Li and Lim benchmark instances.
Each row in the table corresponds to a set of problems with the same number of locations. Each of these problem sets
contain between 56 and 60 instances (see Table 8). The first column indicates the number of locations in each problem;
the next two columns give the total number of vehicles used and the total distance traveled in the previously best known
solutions as listed on the SINTEF web page [25] in the summer of 2003. The next four columns show information about
the solutions obtained by Bent and Van Hentenryck’s heuristic [2]. The two columns Avg. TTB and Avg. time show the
average time needed to reach the best solution and the average time spent on each instance, respectively. Both columns
report the time needed to perform one experiment on one instance. The next three columns report the solutions obtained in
the experiment with the ALNS heuristic where the heuristic was applied either 5 or 10 times to each problem. The last two
columns report the best solutions obtained in several experiments with our ALNS heuristic and with various parameter
settings. Note that Bent and Van Hentenryck in some cases have found slightly better results than reported on the SINTEF
web page in 2003. This is the reason why the number of vehicles used by the BH heuristic for the 200 locations problems
is smaller than in the best known solutions.
possible.
Overall, one can conclude that the ALNS heuristic must be considered as a state of the art heuristic for the
PDPTW. The cost of the best solutions identified during the experiments are listed in Tables 10 to 15.

4.6

Computational tests conclusion

In Section 4.4 we stated three objectives for our computational experiments. The tests fulfilled these objectives
as we saw that: 1) the adaptive LNS heuristic that combines several removal and construction heuristics displays
superior performance compared to the simple LNS heuristic that only uses one insertion heuristic and one
removal heuristic; 2) certain problem characteristics influence the performance of the LNS heuristic but we did
not find that any characteristics could make the LNS heuristic perform better than the ALNS heuristic; 3) the
LNS heuristic indeed is able to find good quality solutions in a reasonable amount of time, and the heuristic
outperforms previously proposed heuristics.
The experiments also illustrate the importance of testing heuristics on large sets of problem instances as the

#locations
100
200
400
600
800
1000

#problems
56
60
60
60
60
58

ALNS best of 10 or 5
<PB
≤PB
0
54
22
42
40
47
41
45
37
42
50
54

ALNS best
<PB ≤PB
0
55
27
57
41
55
51
57
48
53
51
55

Table 8: Comparison of the ALNS heuristic to the previously best known solutions. The table is grouped by problem
size. The first column shows the problem size, the next column shows the number of problems of that size. The next
two columns give additional information about the experiment where the ALNS heuristic was applied 5 or 10 times to
each instance. The columns <PB report how many times the best solution found by the ALNS heuristic was strictly better
than the previously best known solution. The columns ≤PB show how many times the best solution found by ALNS was
at least as good as the previously best known solution. The last two columns show information about the best solutions
obtained during experimentation with different parameter settings.
19

#locations
100
200
400
600
800
1000

Avg. #veh.
403
608
1168
1686
2223
2677

Avg. Dist
58249
181707
425817
867930
1432321
2129032

Table 9: The ALNS heuristic was applied 10 times to each problem with 200 or less locations and 5 times to each
problem with more than 200 locations. The best solutions reported in Table 7 and 8 were of course not obtained in all
experiments. This table shows the average number of vehicles and average distance traveled obtained. These numbers
can be compared to the figures in Table 7

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

19
17
13
9
14
12
10
9
11
10
10
9

R1
1650.80
1487.57
1292.68
1013.39
1377.11
1252.62
1111.31
968.97
1208.96
1159.35
1108.90
1003.77

4
3
3
2
3
3
2
2
3
3
2

R2
1253.23
1197.67
949.40
849.05
1054.02
931.63
903.06
734.85
930.59
964.22
911.52

10
10
9
9
10
10
10
10
9

C1
828.94
828.94
1035.35
860.01
828.94
828.94
828.94
826.44
1000.60

3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

C2
591.56
591.56
591.17
590.60
588.88
588.49
588.29
588.32

14
12
11
10
13
11
11
10

RC1
1708.80
1558.07
1258.74
1128.40
1637.62
1424.73
1230.14
1147.43

4
3
3
3
4
3
3
3

RC2
1406.94
1374.27
1089.07
818.66
1302.20
1159.03
1062.05
852.76

Table 10: Best results, 100 locations. The Li and Lim benchmark instances are divided into six sets: R1, R2, C1, C2,
RC1 and RC2. Each of the major columns corresponds to one of these sets, the column at the left give the problem number.
For each problem instance we report the number of vehicles and the distance traveled in the best solution obtained during
experimentation. Bold numbers indicate best known solutions.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

20
17
15
10
16
14
12
9
14
11

R1
4819.12
4621.21
3612.64
3037.38
4760.18
4178.24
3550.61
2784.53
4354.66
3714.16

5
4
4
3
4
4
3
2
3
3

R2
4073.10
3796.00
3098.36
2486.14
3438.39
3201.54
3135.05
2555.40
3930.49
3344.08

20
19
17
17
20
20
20
20
18
17

C1
2704.57
2764.56
3128.61
2693.41
2702.05
2701.04
2701.04
2689.83
2724.24
2943.49

6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6

C2
1931.44
1881.40
1844.33
1767.12
1891.21
1857.78
1850.13
1824.34
1854.21
1817.45

Table 11: Best results, 200 locations.

20

19
15
13
10
16
17
14
13
13
12

RC1
3606.06
3674.80
3178.17
2631.82
3715.81
3368.66
3668.39
3174.55
3226.72
2951.29

6
5
4
3
5
5
4
4
4
3

RC2
3605.40
3327.18
2938.28
2887.97
2776.93
2707.96
3056.09
2399.95
2208.49
2550.56

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

40
31
23
16
29
25
19
14
24
21

R1
10639.75
10015.85
8840.46
6744.33
10599.54
9525.45
8200.37
5946.44
9886.14
8016.62

8
7
6
4
7
6
5
4
6
5

R2
9758.46
9496.64
8116.53
6649.78
8574.84
7995.06
6928.61
5447.40
8043.20
7904.77

40
38
33
30
40
40
40
39
36
35

C1
7152.06
8012.43
8308.94
6878.00
7150.00
7154.02
7149.43
7111.16
7452.21
7387.13

12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12

C2
4116.33
4144.29
4431.75
4038.00
4030.63
3900.29
3962.51
3844.45
4188.93
3828.44

36
31
25
19
33
31
29
27
26
24

RC1
9127.15
8346.06
7387.40
5838.58
8773.75
8177.90
7992.08
7613.43
8013.48
7065.73

12
11
9
5
11
9
8
7
7
6

RC2
7471.01
6303.36
5438.20
5322.43
6120.13
6479.56
6361.26
5928.93
5303.53
5760.78

Table 12: Best results, 400 locations.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

59
45
37
28
38
32
25
19
32
27

R1
22838.65
20246.18
18073.14
13269.71
22562.81
20641.02
17162.90
11957.59
21423.05
18723.13

11
10
8
6
9
8
6
5
8
7

R2
21945.30
19666.59
15609.96
10819.45
19567.41
17262.96
15812.42
10950.90
18799.36
17034.63

60
58
50
47
60
60
60
59
54
53

C1
14095.64
14379.53
14683.43
13648.03
14086.30
14090.79
14083.76
14554.27
14706.12
14879.30

19
18
17
17
19
19
19
18
18
17

C2
7977.98
10277.23
8728.30
8041.97
8047.37
8094.11
7998.18
7579.93
9501.00
8019.94

53
44
36
25
47
44
39
36
35
31

RC1
17924.88
16302.54
14060.31
10950.52
16742.55
16894.37
15394.87
15154.79
15134.24
13925.51

67
57
50
35
61
58
54
49
47
42

RC1
32268.95
28395.39
24354.36
18241.91
30995.48
28568.61
28164.41
26150.65
24930.70
24271.52

16
14
10
7
14
13
11
10
9
8

RC2
14817.72
12758.77
12812.67
10574.87
13009.52
12643.98
12007.65
12163.43
13768.01
12016.94

20
18
16
12
18
16
15
13
12
10

RC2
23289.40
21786.62
16586.31
14122.05
20292.92
21088.57
19695.96
19009.33
19003.68
19766.78

Table 13: Best results, 600 locations.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

80
59
44
25
50
42
32
21
42
32

R1
39315.92
34370.37
29718.09
21197.65
39046.06
33659.50
27294.19
19570.21
36126.69
30200.86

15
12
10
7
12
10
8
5
10
9

R2
33816.90
32575.97
25310.53
19506.42
32634.29
27870.80
25077.85
19256.79
30791.77
28265.24

80
78
65
60
80
80
80
78
73
71

C1
25184.38
26062.17
25918.45
22970.88
25211.22
25164.25
25158.38
25348.45
25541.94
25712.12

24
24
24
23
25
24
25
24
24
24

C2
11687.06
14358.92
13198.29
13376.82
12329.80
12702.87
11855.86
11482.88
11629.61
11578.58

Table 14: Best results, 800 locations.

21

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

100
80
54
28
61
50
37
26
50
40

R1
56903.88
49652.10
42124.44
32133.36
59135.86
48637.63
38936.54
29452.32
52223.15
46218.35

19
15
11
8
14
12
9
7
13
11

R2
45422.58
47824.44
39894.32
28314.95
53209.98
43792.11
36728.20
26278.09
48447.49
44155.66

100
95
82
74
100
101
100
98
92
90

C1
42488.66
43870.19
42631.11
39443.00
42477.41
42838.39
42854.99
42951.56
42391.98
42435.16

30
31
30
29
31
31
31
30
31
29

C2
16879.24
18980.98
17772.49
18089.93
17137.53
17198.01
19117.67
17018.63
17565.95
17425.55

85
73
55
40
76
69
64
60
57
52

RC1
48702.83
45135.70
35475.72
27747.04
49816.18
44469.08
41413.16
40590.17
39587.85
36195.00

22
21
16
12
18
17
17
12

RC2
35073.70
30932.74
28403.51
23083.20
34713.96
31485.26
29639.63
29402.90

Table 15: Best results, 1000 locations. Two entries are missing as the corresponding problem instances no longer exist.
difference between LNS and ALNS only really becomes apparent when we consider large instances. Note that
the problems that need to be solved in the real world often have dimensions comparable to or greater than the
biggest problems solved in this paper.
Finally the computational experiments performed in Section 4.3.3 indicated that a simple LNS heuristic
seems to be more sensitive to the choices of removal heuristic compared to the choices of insertion heuristics.
It would be interesting to see if this holds in general for other problems as well.

5

Conclusion

This paper presented an extension to the large neighborhood search and the ruin and recreate heuristic called
adaptive LNS. The heuristic was tested on the pickup and delivery problem with time windows achieving good
results in a reasonable amount of time. The idea of combining several sub heuristics in the same search proved
to be successful.
As the proposed model is quite general would be interesting to examine if the model and heuristic can be
used to solve other vehicle routing problems. We are currently working on this topic and the results are very
promising as the heuristic has been able to discover new best solutions to standard benchmarks for vehicle routing problems with time windows and multi-depot vehicle routing problems and other vehicle routing problems
[16], [20].
It would also be interesting to apply the ideas presented in this paper to other combinatorial optimization
problems. The adaptive LNS framework is easily applicable to most problems, taking advantage of the numerous robust and fast construction heuristics designed during the last decades for various optimization problems.

6

Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thank Jakob Birkedal Nielsen for helpful discussions during the development of the heuristic presented in this paper and Emilie Danna for valuable criticism of the paper. Furthermore we would like to
thank the three anonymous referees for valuable comments and corrections.

7

Appendix

Tables 16 to 21 show detailed information about the solutions found during the experiment described in Section
4.5.

References
[1] R.K. Ahuja, O. Ergun, J.B. Orlin, A.P. Punnen, A survey of Very Large Scale Neighborhood Search Techniques, Discrete Applied Mathematics 123 (2002), 75-102.
22

[2] R. Bent, P. Van Hentenryck, A Two-Stage Hybrid Algorithm for Pickup and Delivery Vehicle Routing
Problems with Time Windows, Proceedings of the International Conference on Constraint Programming
(CP-2003), Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2833, 123-137.
[3] R. Bent, P. Van Hentenryck, A Two-Stage Hybrid Algorithm for Pickup and Delivery Vehicle Routing Problems with Time Windows, Appendix, available at http://www.cs.brown.edu/people/rbent/pickupappendix.ps.
[4] R. Bent, P. Van Hentenryck, A Two-Stage Hybrid Local Search for the Vehicle Routing Problem with Time
Windows, To appear in Transportation Science.
[5] J.-F. Cordeau, G. Laporte, A. Mercier, A Unified Tabu Search Heuristic for Vehicle Routing Problems with
Time Windows, Journal of the Operational Research Society 52 (2001), 928-936.
[6] T.H. Cormen, C.E., Leiserson, R.L. Rivest, C. Stein, Introduction to Algorithms, Second Edition, MIT
Press, 2001.
[7] G. Desaulniers, J. Desrosiers, A. Erdmann, M.M. Solomon, F. Soumis, The VRP with Pickup and Delivery,
in P. Toth and D. Vigo (eds.): The Vehicle Routing Problem, SIAM Monographs on Discrete Mathematics
and Applications 9 (2002), SIAM, Philadelphia, 225-242.
[8] Y. Dumas, J. Desrosiers, F. Soumis, The pickup and delivery problem with time windows, European Journal of Operational Research 54 (1991), 7-22.
[9] M. Gendreau, F. Guertin, J.-Y. Potvin, R. Séguin, Neighborhood Search Heuristics for a Dynamic Vehicle
Dispatching Problem with Pick-ups and Deliveries, Tech. Rep. CRT-98-10, Centre de Recherche sur les
Transport, Universite de Montreal.
[10] H. C. Lau, Z. Liang, Pickup and Delivery with Time Windows : Algorithms and Test Case Generation,
The 13th IEEE Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence, ICTAI-2001, Dallas, USA, 333-340.
[11] H. Li, A. Lim, A Metaheuristic for the Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows, The 13th IEEE
Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence, ICTAI-2001, Dallas, USA, 160-170.
[12] H. Lim, A. Lim, B. Rodrigues, Solving the Pick up and Delivery Problem with Time Windows using
“Squeaky Wheel” Optimization with Local Search, Technical Report 2002, Singapore Management University, Paper No. 7-2002
[13] S. Martello, P. Toth, An algorithm for the generalized assignment problem, Operational Research ’81, J.P.
Brans (editor), North-Holland, New York (1981).
[14] N. Mladenović, P. Hansen, Variable neighborhood search, Computers and Operations Research 24, No.
11 (1997), 1097-1100.
[15] W.P. Nanry, J.W. Barnes, Solving the pickup and delivery problem with time windows using reactive tabu
search, Transportation Research Part B 34 (2000), 107-121.
[16] D. Pisinger, S. Ropke, A general heuristic for vehicle routing problems, accepted for publication, Computers and Operations Research (2005).
[17] J.-Y. Potvin, J.-M. Rousseau, A parallel route building algorithm for the vehicle routing and scheduling
problem with time windows, European Journal of Operational Research 66 (1993), 331-340.
[18] S. Ropke, D. Pisinger, An Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search Heuristic for the Pickup and Delivery
Problem with Time Windows, Technical Report, Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen 2004.
[19] S. Ropke, Heuristics for the Multi-Vehicle Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows, Masters
Thesis 01-11-8, Department of Computer Science, Univerity of Copenhagen, 2002.

23

[20] S. Ropke, D. Pisinger, A Unified Heuristic for a Large Class of Vehicle Routing Problems with Backhauls,
to appear in European Journal of Operational Research.
[21] P. Shaw, A new local search algorithm providing high quality solutions to vehicle routing problems, Technical report, Department of Computer Science, University of Strathclyde, Scotland, 1997.
[22] P. Shaw, Using Constraint Programming and Local Search Methods to Solve Vehicle Routing Problems,
Proceedings CP-98 (Fourth International Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming), 1998.
[23] G. Schrimpf, J. Schneider, H. Stamm-Wilbrandt, G. Dueck, Record Breaking Optimization Results Using
the Ruin and Recreate Principle, Journal of Computational Physics 159 (2000), 139-171.
[24] M. Sigurd , D. Pisinger, M. Sig, The Pickup and Delivery Problem With Time Windows and Precedences,
Transportation Science 38 (2004), 197-209.
[25] SINTEF,
Vehicle
Routing
and
Travelling
Salesperson
http://www.sintef.no/static/am/opti/projects/top/vrp/benchmarks.html

Problems,

Web

page:

[26] M.M. Solomon, Algorithms for the vehicle routing and scheduling problems with time window constraints,
Operations Research 35 (1987), 254-265.
[27] M.A Trick, A Linear Relaxation Heuristic for the Generalized Assignment Problem, Naval Research Logistics 39 (1992), 137-152.
[28] P. Toth, D. Vigo, An Overview of Vehicle Routing Problems, In P. Toth and D. Vigo (eds.): The Vehicle Routing Problem, SIAM Monographs on Discrete Mathematics and Applications 9 (2002), SIAM,
Philadelphia, 1-26.
[29] H. Xu, Z.-L. Chen, S. Rajagopal, S. Arunapuram, Solving a Practical Pickup and Delivery Problem,
Transportation Science 37 (2003), 347-364.

24

LR101
LR102
LR103
LR104
LR105
LR106
LR107
LR108
LR109
LR110
LR111
LR112
LC101
LC102
LC103
LC104
LC105
LC106
LC107
LC108
LC109
LRC101
LRC102
LRC103
LRC104
LRC105
LRC106
LRC107
LRC108
LR201
LR202
LR203
LR204
LR205
LR206
LR207
LR208
LR209
LR210
LR211
LC201
LC202
LC203
LC204
LC205
LC206
LC207
LC208
LRC201
LRC202
LRC203
LRC204
LRC205
LRC206
LRC207
LRC208
Tot.
Avg.
< PB
<= PB
#B

veh.

Best known
cost
References

19
17
13
9
14
12
10
9
11
10
10
9
10
10
9
9
10
10
10
10
9
14
12
11
10
13
11
11
10
4
3
3
2
3
3
2
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
3
4
3
3
3
402

1650.8
1487.57
1292.68
1013.39
1377.11
1252.62
1111.31
968.97
1208.96
1159.35
1108.9
1003.77
828.94
828.94
1035.35
860.01
828.94
828.94
828.94
826.44
1000.6
1708.8
1558.07
1258.74
1128.4
1637.62
1424.73
1230.15
1147.43
1253.23
1197.67
949.4
849.05
1054.02
931.63
903.06
734.85
930.59
964.22
911.52
591.56
591.56
585.56
590.6
588.88
588.49
588.29
588.32
1406.94
1374.27
1089.07
818.66
1302.2
1159.03
1062.05
852.76
58054

LL
LL
LL
LL
LL
LL
LL
LL
SAM
LL
LL
LL
LL
LL
BH
SAM
LL
LL
LL
LL
BH
LL
SAM
LL
LL
LL
SAM
LL
SAM
SAM
LL
LL
LL
LL
LL
LL
LL
SAM
LL
SAM
LL
LL
LL
SAM
LL
LL
LL
LL
SAM
LL
SAM
SAM
LL
SAM
SAM
LL

FULL
avg.
sol.

avg.
#veh.

best
sol.

best
#veh.

avg.
time
(s)

1650.80
1487.57
1292.68
1013.39
1377.11
1252.62
1111.31
968.97
1208.96
1159.35
1108.90
1003.77
828.94
828.94
1037.77
860.15
828.94
828.94
828.94
826.44
1000.60
1708.80
1558.07
1258.74
1128.40
1637.62
1424.73
1230.14
1147.43
1253.23
1197.67
949.40
849.05
1054.02
931.63
903.06
734.85
930.59
964.22
906.69
591.56
591.56
591.17
590.60
588.88
588.49
588.29
588.32
1406.94
1387.74
1089.07
818.66
1302.20
1337.75
1062.05
852.76
58249.42

19.0
17.0
13.0
9.0
14.0
12.0
10.0
9.0
11.0
10.0
10.0
9.0
10.0
10.0
9.0
9.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
9.0
14.0
12.0
11.0
10.0
13.0
11.0
11.0
10.0
4.0
3.0
3.0
2.0
3.0
3.0
2.0
2.0
3.0
3.0
2.2
3.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
4.0
3.8
3.0
3.0
4.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
403.00

1650.80
1487.57
1292.68
1013.39
1377.11
1252.62
1111.31
968.97
1208.96
1159.35
1108.90
1003.77
828.94
828.94
1035.35
860.01
828.94
828.94
828.94
826.44
1000.60
1708.80
1558.07
1258.74
1128.40
1637.62
1424.73
1230.14
1147.43
1253.23
1197.67
949.40
849.05
1054.02
931.63
903.06
734.85
930.59
964.22
911.52
591.56
591.56
591.17
590.60
588.88
588.49
588.29
588.32
1406.94
1374.79
1089.07
818.66
1302.20
1159.03
1062.05
852.76
58060.03

19
17
13
9
14
12
10
9
11
10
10
9
10
10
9
9
10
10
10
10
9
14
12
11
10
13
11
11
10
4
3
3
2
3
3
2
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
3
4
3
3
3
402

40
47
45
26
40
41
44
25
41
35
44
27
43
44
49
63
41
42
43
46
35
38
41
43
52
42
42
43
25
69
60
98
181
58
86
187
285
73
77
126
36
59
81
141
48
60
62
69
38
82
69
173
75
48
66
88
3680
66

1
54
54

55

LNS best known
veh.
cost

19
17
13
9
14
12
10
9
11
10
10
9
10
10
9
9
10
10
10
10
9
14
12
11
10
13
11
11
10
4
3
3
2
3
3
2
2
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
3
3
3
4
3
3
3
402

1650.80
1487.57
1292.68
1013.39
1377.11
1252.62
1111.31
968.97
1208.96
1159.35
1108.90
1003.77
828.94
828.94
1035.35
860.01
828.94
828.94
828.94
826.44
1000.60
1708.80
1558.07
1258.74
1128.40
1637.62
1424.73
1230.14
1147.43
1253.23
1197.67
949.40
849.05
1054.02
931.63
903.06
734.85
930.59
964.22
911.52
591.56
591.56
591.17
590.60
588.88
588.49
588.29
588.32
1406.94
1374.27
1089.07
818.66
1302.20
1159.03
1062.05
852.76
58059.50
1
55
55

Table 16: Results on 100-customer problems solved with vehicle minimization as primary objective. The first column
contains the name of the problem, columns two to four show information about the previously best known solutions.
Columns two and three give the number of vehicles in the solution and the total traveled distance. Column four refers to
the method that first found the solution (LL: Li and Lim [11], BH: Bent and Van Hentenryck [2], SAM: SINTEF heuristic,
TS: TetraSoft A/S heuristic). The next five columns show information about the solutions obtained by the ALNS LNS
heuristic. The first two of these columns show the average distance traveled and the average number of vehicles (averaged
over the 10 experiments performed). The two next column display the the best solution obtained in the 10 experiments.
The column avg. time displays the average time needed to perform one experiment in seconds. The two last columns
show the best results obtained during experimentation with various parameter settings. The last 5 columns provide some
summary information. The Tot. and Avg. rows respectively sums and averages entries in the columns. The <PB row
indicates how many solutions that are better than the previously best known solution and the <=PB row indicates how
many solution that are at least as good as the previously best known solution. #B reports the number of overall best known
solutions that were obtained. Best known solutions are marked with bold font.

25

LR1_2_1
LR1_2_2
LR1_2_3
LR1_2_4
LR1_2_5
LR1_2_6
LR1_2_7
LR1_2_8
LR1_2_9
LR1_2_10
LRC1_2_1
LRC1_2_2
LRC1_2_3
LRC1_2_4
LRC1_2_5
LRC1_2_6
LRC1_2_7
LRC1_2_8
LRC1_2_9
LRC1_2_10
LC1_2_1
LC1_2_2
LC1_2_3
LC1_2_4
LC1_2_5
LC1_2_6
LC1_2_7
LC1_2_8
LC1_2_9
LC1_2_10
LR2_2_1
LR2_2_2
LR2_2_3
LR2_2_4
LR2_2_5
LR2_2_6
LR2_2_7
LR2_2_8
LR2_2_9
LR2_2_10
LRC2_2_1
LRC2_2_2
LRC2_2_3
LRC2_2_4
LRC2_2_5
LRC2_2_6
LRC2_2_7
LRC2_2_8
LRC2_2_9
LRC2_2_10
LC2_2_1
LC2_2_2
LC2_2_3
LC2_2_4
LC2_2_5
LC2_2_6
LC2_2_7
LC2_2_8
LC2_2_9
LC2_2_10
Tot.
Avg.
< PB
<= PB
#B

veh.

Best known
cost
References

20
17
15
10
16
14
12
9
14
11
19
15
13
10
16
17
15
14
14
13
20
19
17
17
20
20
20
20
18
18
5
4
4
3
4
4
3
3
4
3
6
6
4
4
5
5
4
4
4
3
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
615

4819.12
4666.09
3612.64
3146.06
4760.18
4175.16
3851.36
2871.67
4411.54
3744.95
3606.06
3681.36
3161.75
2655.27
3715.81
3368.66
3417.16
3087.62
3129.65
2833.85
2704.57
2764.56
3134.08
2698.73
2702.05
2701.04
2701.04
2689.83
2724.24
2741.56
4073.1
3796
3098.36
2487.65
3438.39
3201.54
3190.75
2187.01
3198.44
3377.45
3690.1
2666.01
3141.28
2190.88
2776.93
2707.96
3050.03
2401.84
2209.54
2699.55
1931.44
1881.4
1844.33
1767.12
1891.21
1857.78
1850.13
1824.34
1854.21
1817.45
178380

LL
BH
TS
BH
BH
BH
BH
BH
BH
BH
SAM
BH
BH
BH
BH
SAM
BH
BH
BH
BH
LL
LL
BH
TS
LL
LL
LL
LL
LL
LL
SAM
SAM
SAM
TS
SAM
LL
LL
TS
SAM
SAM
BH
BH
SAM
TS
BH
SAM
BH
BH
SAM
BH
SAM
LL
SAM
LL
LL
SAM
SAM
LL
SAM
LL

FULL
avg.
sol.

avg.
#veh.

best
sol.

best
#veh.

avg.
time
(s)

4819.12
4625.99
3626.13
3088.07
4852.41
4261.23
3580.94
2823.91
4438.36
3787.23
3606.06
3684.82
3211.85
2660.26
3718.57
3372.68
3525.21
3220.69
3259.40
2968.69
2704.57
2764.56
3142.99
2711.42
2702.05
2701.04
2701.04
2689.83
2724.24
2967.24
4110.08
4194.32
3209.80
2495.48
3440.71
3204.44
3216.40
2613.39
3272.31
3387.47
3722.20
3403.75
3138.84
3006.86
2786.49
2713.57
3140.57
2409.16
2214.37
2558.03
1931.44
1881.40
1845.57
1772.02
1891.21
1857.93
1850.60
1825.88
1854.43
1818.04
181707.35

20.0
17.0
15.0
10.0
16.0
14.0
12.0
9.0
14.0
11.0
19.0
15.0
13.0
10.0
16.0
17.0
14.7
13.2
13.1
12.1
20.0
19.0
17.0
17.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
18.0
17.0
5.0
4.0
4.0
3.0
4.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
3.9
3.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
5.0
5.0
4.0
4.0
4.0
3.1
6.0
6.0
6.0
6.0
6.0
6.0
6.0
6.0
6.0
6.0
608.10

4819.12
4621.21
3612.64
3058.12
4760.18
4184.80
3551.47
2784.53
4354.66
3741.29
3606.06
3674.80
3178.17
2641.67
3716.72
3368.74
3668.39
3174.55
3226.72
2967.70
2704.57
2764.56
3136.42
2704.41
2702.05
2701.04
2701.04
2689.83
2724.24
2943.49
4073.10
4113.64
3098.36
2491.87
3439.40
3201.86
3135.05
2559.70
3930.49
3360.74
3622.11
3327.18
2965.88
2891.10
2782.83
2710.14
3056.09
2404.09
2210.88
2551.67
1931.44
1881.40
1844.66
1768.22
1891.21
1857.78
1850.13
1824.73
1854.21
1817.45
180930.62

20
17
15
10
16
14
12
9
14
11
19
15
13
10
16
17
14
13
13
12
20
19
17
17
20
20
20
20
18
17
5
4
4
3
4
4
3
2
3
3
6
5
4
3
5
5
4
4
4
3
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
606

137
149
173
228
136
164
173
226
144
146
136
143
183
284
141
141
140
144
140
156
146
141
155
209
137
133
139
145
157
104
230
249
696
1191
207
499
521
1114
425
342
117
201
323
993
302
302
217
286
410
467
100
157
234
427
121
150
151
193
193
245
15815
264

22
42
31

33

Table 17: Results on 200-customer problems

26

LNS best known
veh.
cost

20
17
15
10
16
14
12
9
14
11
19
15
13
10
16
17
14
13
13
12
20
19
17
17
20
20
20
20
18
17
5
4
4
3
4
4
3
2
3
3
6
5
4
3
5
5
4
4
4
3
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
606

4819.12
4621.21
3612.64
3037.38
4760.18
4178.24
3550.61
2784.53
4354.66
3714.16
3606.06
3674.80
3178.17
2631.82
3715.81
3368.66
3668.39
3174.55
3226.72
2951.29
2704.57
2764.56
3128.61
2693.41
2702.05
2701.04
2701.04
2689.83
2724.24
2943.49
4073.10
3796.00
3098.36
2486.14
3438.39
3201.54
3135.05
2555.40
3930.49
3344.08
3605.40
3327.18
2938.28
2887.97
2776.93
2707.96
3056.09
2399.95
2208.49
2550.56
1931.44
1881.40
1844.33
1767.12
1891.21
1857.78
1850.13
1824.34
1854.21
1817.45
180418.58
27
57
57

veh.

LR1_4_1
LR1_4_2
LR1_4_3
LR1_4_4
LR1_4_5
LR1_4_6
LR1_4_7
LR1_4_8
LR1_4_9
LR1_4_10
LR2_4_1
LR2_4_2
LR2_4_3
LR2_4_4
LR2_4_5
LR2_4_6
LR2_4_7
LR2_4_8
LR2_4_9
LR2_4_10
LC1_4_1
LC1_4_2
LC1_4_3
LC1_4_4
LC1_4_5
LC1_4_6
LC1_4_7
LC1_4_8
LC1_4_9
LC1_4_10
LC2_4_1
LC2_4_2
LC2_4_3
LC2_4_4
LC2_4_5
LC2_4_6
LC2_4_7
LC2_4_8
LC2_4_9
LC2_4_10
LRC1_4_1
LRC1_4_2
LRC1_4_3
LRC1_4_4
LRC1_4_5
LRC1_4_6
LRC1_4_7
LRC1_4_8
LRC1_4_9
LRC1_4_10
LRC2_4_1
LRC2_4_2
LRC2_4_3
LRC2_4_4
LRC2_4_5
LRC2_4_6
LRC2_4_7
LRC2_4_8
LRC2_4_9
LRC2_4_10
Tot.
Avg.
< PB
<= PB
#B

40
31
24
17
30
25
21
15
25
22
8
8
6
5
7
6
5
4
6
6
40
39
35
30
40
40
40
39
36
36
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
37
31
25
19
34
31
30
28
27
24
13
11
9
6
11
10
9
8
7
7
1183

Best known
cost
References

10639.75
10533.33
8831.1
5551.47
10233.59
9456.68
8012.3
6320.03
10313.6
8249.87
9726.88
7971.09
9794.4
5116.24
9314.23
9439.98
7935.54
6043.41
8552.29
7449.9
7152.06
7326.93
7896.36
6451.68
7150
7154.02
7149.43
7111.16
7539.92
7181.05
4116.33
4144.29
4624.76
3743.95
4030.63
3900.29
3962.51
3844.45
4198.61
3828.44
8944.58
8642.74
7307.09
5944.14
9133.11
8817.39
7869.45
7887.67
8215.25
7404.91
6655.52
7467.34
5480.25
4279.05
6120.13
6002.63
5737.02
5364.31
6892.23
5057.81
421215

TS
SAM
SAM
LL
TS
BH
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
BH
SAM
SAM
LL
SAM
SAM
SAM
LL
SAM
TS
SAM
BH
SAM
LL
SAM
LL
SAM
LL
SAM
TS
LL
SAM
SAM
LL
TS
SAM
BH
SAM
SAM
BH
TS
SAM
BH
TS
SAM
SAM
BH
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
TS
LL
BH
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
TS

FULL
avg.
sol.

avg.
#veh.

best
sol.

best
#veh.

avg.
time
(s)

10652.59
10125.79
8846.24
6974.01
10606.32
9686.93
8170.00
6093.04
9908.16
8233.16
10243.45
9995.30
8586.52
6948.40
8893.25
8156.35
7126.64
5591.83
8613.50
8008.78
7152.06
7395.61
8538.36
7013.38
7150.00
7154.02
7149.43
7111.86
7471.34
7278.25
4116.33
4145.71
4533.47
4123.21
4030.97
3905.41
3976.03
3879.38
4229.42
3846.45
9059.11
8189.18
7413.29
5918.81
8760.38
8236.27
7969.23
7625.79
7942.38
7190.05
7750.57
6385.15
5485.05
5446.01
6147.77
6540.83
6497.14
6004.71
5469.65
6124.51
425816.87

40.0
31.0
23.3
16.0
29.1
25.0
19.7
14.1
24.7
21.0
8.0
7.0
6.0
4.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
6.0
5.2
40.0
38.9
33.1
30.7
40.0
40.0
40.0
39.0
36.1
35.8
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
36.5
32.0
25.7
19.0
34.0
31.2
29.8
27.9
26.8
24.0
12.0
11.0
9.0
5.0
11.0
9.1
8.0
7.1
7.0
6.0
1167.80

10639.75
10015.85
8908.01
6814.84
10599.54
9573.68
8200.37
6044.40
9886.14
8145.03
9786.02
9717.03
8116.53
6695.51
8642.63
8089.75
6928.61
5447.40
8135.86
7904.77
7152.06
8012.43
8308.94
7021.92
7150.00
7154.02
7149.43
7111.16
7458.43
7474.07
4116.33
4144.49
4483.34
4081.93
4030.64
3902.25
3969.69
3867.31
4209.49
3839.11
9127.15
8404.51
7429.00
5901.86
8715.74
8198.96
7992.08
7613.43
8013.48
7103.78
7471.01
6332.52
5459.06
5405.16
6140.07
6479.56
6361.26
5968.27
5394.73
5760.78
422201.17

40
31
23
16
29
25
19
14
24
21
8
7
6
4
7
6
5
4
6
5
40
38
33
30
40
40
40
39
36
35
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
36
31
25
19
34
31
29
27
26
24
12
11
9
5
11
9
8
7
7
6
1158

351
554
613
575
457
554
610
568
480
516
467
761
1451
3409
1096
1236
2019
4603
780
1385
585
597
628
558
508
520
529
542
462
501
319
455
681
1169
366
475
481
549
604
811
498
550
644
909
487
475
500
510
494
503
553
1102
2126
4032
827
757
707
834
1275
1243
52850
881

40
47
25

19

Table 18: Results on 400-customer problems

27

LNS best known
veh.
cost

40
31
23
16
29
25
19
14
24
21
8
7
6
4
7
6
5
4
6
5
40
38
33
30
40
40
40
39
36
35
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
36
31
25
19
33
31
29
27
26
24
12
11
9
5
11
9
8
7
7
6
1157

10639.75
10015.85
8840.46
6744.33
10599.54
9525.45
8200.37
5946.44
9886.14
8016.62
9758.46
9496.64
8116.53
6649.78
8574.84
7995.06
6928.61
5447.40
8043.20
7904.77
7152.06
8012.43
8308.94
6878.00
7150.00
7154.02
7149.43
7111.16
7452.21
7387.13
4116.33
4144.29
4431.75
4038.00
4030.63
3900.29
3962.51
3844.45
4188.93
3828.44
9127.15
8346.06
7387.40
5838.58
8773.75
8177.90
7992.08
7613.43
8013.48
7065.73
7471.01
6303.36
5438.20
5322.43
6120.13
6479.56
6361.26
5928.93
5303.53
5760.78
420395.99
41
55
55

veh.

LR1_6_1
LR1_6_2
LR1_6_3
LR1_6_4
LR1_6_5
LR1_6_6
LR1_6_7
LR1_6_8
LR1_6_9
LR1_6_10
LR2_6_1
LR2_6_2
LR2_6_3
LR2_6_4
LR2_6_5
LR2_6_6
LR2_6_7
LR2_6_8
LR2_6_9
LR2_6_10
LC1_6_1
LC1_6_2
LC1_6_3
LC1_6_4
LC1_6_5
LC1_6_6
LC1_6_7
LC1_6_8
LC1_6_9
LC1_6_10
LC2_6_1
LC2_6_2
LC2_6_3
LC2_6_4
LC2_6_5
LC2_6_6
LC2_6_7
LC2_6_8
LC2_6_9
LC2_6_10
LRC1_6_1
LRC1_6_2
LRC1_6_3
LRC1_6_4
LRC1_6_5
LRC1_6_6
LRC1_6_7
LRC1_6_8
LRC1_6_9
LRC1_6_10
LRC2_6_1
LRC2_6_2
LRC2_6_3
LRC2_6_4
LRC2_6_5
LRC2_6_6
LRC2_6_7
LRC2_6_8
LRC2_6_9
LRC2_6_10
Tot.
Avg.
< PB
<= PB
#B

59
45
37
28
39
33
27
20
34
28
12
11
9
7
10
9
7
6
9
7
60
58
51
48
60
60
60
59
55
54
19
19
18
18
19
19
19
18
19
18
53
45
36
25
47
44
39
36
36
31
17
15
11
8
14
13
11
11
10
9
1699

Best known
cost
References

22838.3
20985.7
18685.9
13945.59
22985.63
21427.75
17070.51
12669.88
21273.3
19337.5
18840.8
17452.75
17598.73
11771.45
19347.2
19889.05
16262
11652.95
18853.4
18449.18
14095.6
14379.5
14569.3
13567.51
14086.3
14090.79
14083.76
14554.27
14626.25
14627.2
7977.98
8253.67
7436.5
8200.89
8047.37
8169.95
8038.56
7808.16
8134.25
7555.35
17930
16040.3
14407.6
11308.6
16803.9
18205.25
16407.68
15352.6
15751.84
14304.37
13111.6
11463
15167.3
12512.5
15576.76
12655.11
13996.73
14572.07
12262.51
12379.46
873850

BVH
BVH
BVH
TS
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
BVH
SAM
BVH
TS
SAM
TS
SAM
SAM
BVH
TS
BVH
SAM
LL
BVH
BVH
LL
LL
SAM
SAM
SAM
TS
TS
SAM
SAM
BVH
TS
BVH
TS
BVH
SAM
SAM
TS
BVH
BVH
BVH
BVH
BVH
SAM
SAM
BVH
SAM
SAM
BVH
BVH
BVH
BVH
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
TS
TS

FULL
avg.
sol.

avg.
#veh.

best
sol.

best
#veh.

avg.
time
(s)

23070.74
20714.68
18619.94
13677.43
21983.13
20373.88
16615.48
12412.57
20917.36
18400.79
22245.55
20038.78
16161.38
11627.85
20529.74
18788.90
16052.41
11175.02
19465.02
17599.63
14095.64
14383.04
14676.36
13806.44
14086.30
14090.79
14083.76
14557.89
14676.34
14918.57
7977.98
10612.70
7781.67
8279.98
8068.59
8149.37
8108.38
7632.38
8173.11
7529.02
18017.12
16090.72
14395.28
11260.62
16837.12
17059.61
15582.48
15346.86
15092.82
14036.50
14989.05
12856.00
12413.60
10461.14
13287.40
12717.44
12109.64
12681.15
14236.58
12300.10
867929.80

59.0
45.0
37.0
28.0
39.0
33.0
26.6
19.0
33.2
28.0
11.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
9.0
8.0
6.0
5.0
8.0
7.0
60.0
58.0
50.8
49.0
60.0
60.0
60.0
59.0
56.0
55.6
19.0
18.0
17.8
17.2
19.0
19.0
19.0
18.0
19.0
18.0
53.0
44.8
36.0
25.0
47.8
45.0
39.6
36.0
36.2
32.0
16.0
14.0
10.6
7.4
14.0
13.0
11.0
10.0
9.0
8.0
1686.60

22975.40
20614.87
18548.01
13604.92
22562.81
20060.42
16746.97
12302.45
20765.52
18233.75
22049.96
19666.59
15897.51
10916.25
20079.56
17599.80
15877.37
11026.09
19180.31
17261.53
14095.64
14380.37
15028.86
13750.06
14086.30
14090.79
14083.76
14554.81
14596.57
14711.59
7977.98
10384.03
9007.34
8281.94
8061.74
8129.87
8086.65
7616.85
8160.19
7511.89
17965.79
16302.54
14310.59
11097.51
16831.90
16994.01
15565.62
15174.29
15000.49
13940.77
14844.71
12801.40
12812.67
10574.87
13216.21
12709.04
12070.35
12565.94
13966.61
12129.35
863441.95

59
45
37
28
38
33
26
19
33
28
11
10
8
6
9
8
6
5
8
7
60
58
50
49
60
60
60
59
56
55
19
18
17
17
19
19
19
18
19
18
53
44
36
25
47
45
39
36
36
32
16
14
10
7
14
13
11
10
9
8
1679

1443
1438
1620
2119
1105
1299
1476
1916
1059
989
1245
2089
3729
12849
1300
2238
6915
10329
2123
1928
1453
1440
1153
1066
1201
1198
1203
1263
1261
1329
1137
1277
2033
2303
1268
1016
1133
1067
1225
1775
1342
1389
1725
2496
1256
1175
1135
1099
1141
1058
1194
2106
4830
13452
1827
1826
1397
2341
2094
2340
133234
2221

41
45
9

9

Table 19: Results on 600-customer problems

28

LNS best known
veh.
cost

59
45
37
28
38
32
25
19
32
27
11
10
8
6
9
8
6
5
8
7
60
58
50
47
60
60
60
59
54
53
19
18
17
17
19
19
19
18
18
17
53
44
36
25
47
44
39
36
35
31
16
14
10
7
14
13
11
10
9
8
1664

22838.65
20246.18
18073.14
13269.71
22562.81
20641.02
17162.90
11957.59
21423.05
18723.13
21945.30
19666.59
15609.96
10819.45
19567.41
17262.96
15812.42
10950.90
18799.36
17034.63
14095.64
14379.53
14683.43
13648.03
14086.30
14090.79
14083.76
14554.27
14706.12
14879.30
7977.98
10277.23
8728.30
8041.97
8047.37
8094.11
7998.18
7579.93
9501.00
8019.94
17924.88
16302.54
14060.31
10950.52
16742.55
16894.37
15394.87
15154.79
15134.24
13925.51
14817.72
12758.77
12812.67
10574.87
13009.52
12643.98
12007.65
12163.43
13768.01
12016.94
860898.44
51
57
57

veh.

LR181
LR182
LR183
LR184
LR185
LR186
LR187
LR188
LR189
LR1810
LR281
LR282
LR283
LR284
LR285
LR286
LR287
LR288
LR289
LR2810
LC181
LC182
LC183
LC184
LC185
LC186
LC187
LC188
LC189
LC1810
LC281
LC282
LC283
LC284
LC285
LC286
LC287
LC288
LC289
LC2810
LRC181
LRC182
LRC183
LRC184
LRC185
LRC186
LRC187
LRC188
LRC189
LRC1810
LRC281
LRC282
LRC283
LRC284
LRC285
LRC286
LRC287
LRC288
LRC289
LRC2810
Tot.
Avg.
< PB
<= PB
#B

80
59
45
26
52
42
34
24
44
34
16
13
11
8
12
10
9
7
11
10
80
78
66
61
80
80
80
78
74
72
24
25
25
24
25
25
25
24
24
24
67
56
49
35
60
56
53
49
47
43
21
19
17
13
18
16
15
13
13
12
2213

Best known
cost
References

39374.4
36122.5
31763
23454.57
39743.88
35011.85
28551.92
21891.97
36550.5
31443.25
29961.22
37565.81
30046.47
24925.57
34256.18
30688.6
28524.9
19878.42
34700.25
31906.16
25184.38
26056.2
26700.6
23427.2
25211.22
25164.25
25158.38
25427.1
25536
26364.93
11687.06
12575
12500.5
13438.1
12298.9
12064.8
11899.18
11724.46
11700.86
12139.06
32587.9
28843.1
24933.9
18768.4
32578.04
29971.97
29948.45
28160.88
26668.91
25787.27
21486.1
19127.96
18842.56
17693.9
21626.63
25106.28
23808.4
24260
19514
19865.4
1492200

LL
BVH
BVH
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
BVH
TS
SAM
SAM
SAM
BVH
BVH
BVH
SAM
SAM
SAM
BVH
BVH
TS
SAM
BVH
BVH
TS
BVH
BVH
TS
TS
TS
TS
BVH
BVH
BVH
BVH
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
LL
SAM
TS
BVH
TS
SAM
SAM
SAM
BVH
BVH

FULL
avg.
sol.

avg.
#veh.

best
sol.

best
#veh.

avg.
time
(s)

39847.80
35197.46
30506.10
21738.05
37834.13
33815.72
27347.55
20182.46
35693.92
29741.89
34422.50
30839.74
26211.39
20085.04
34919.19
29070.99
25809.90
18168.34
30325.20
29604.30
25184.38
26186.79
26135.96
23880.34
25211.22
25164.25
25158.38
25262.20
26352.66
26896.75
11687.06
12634.54
13687.38
12662.06
12357.15
12112.84
11895.72
11649.71
11685.81
11693.40
32275.83
28306.81
24672.74
18696.22
31439.49
29037.55
28696.11
26889.40
25538.12
24424.49
21905.03
20056.42
16423.77
14406.39
20541.12
21271.46
20402.90
19670.06
19548.71
19257.95
1432320.80

80.0
59.0
44.0
25.6
52.4
42.6
32.8
21.2
43.0
33.6
15.0
12.8
10.0
7.0
12.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
10.8
9.0
80.0
78.0
66.8
62.4
80.0
80.0
80.0
79.0
75.4
75.0
24.0
25.0
24.0
24.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
24.0
24.0
24.0
67.6
58.4
51.0
35.0
63.2
59.8
55.8
50.8
48.6
44.2
20.8
19.2
16.4
12.0
18.0
16.0
15.0
13.0
12.0
10.8
2223.00

39719.88
34746.99
30301.99
21900.66
37856.78
34315.99
28327.14
20256.27
35531.29
29587.53
34124.11
33326.43
25446.52
19506.42
33961.98
28629.45
25077.85
17800.02
31891.23
28941.03
25184.38
26131.65
26308.88
23786.46
25211.22
25164.25
25158.38
25255.06
26363.13
26522.79
11687.06
12614.42
13551.68
12593.32
12350.55
12090.57
11878.10
11592.23
11673.27
11615.76
32268.95
28180.05
24628.67
18666.34
31121.74
28934.95
28543.20
26971.48
25578.39
24156.12
23476.51
19930.17
16846.85
14122.05
20474.88
21209.60
19764.32
19423.27
19267.46
20530.09
1432077.81

80
59
44
25
52
42
32
21
43
33
15
12
10
7
12
10
8
6
10
9
80
78
66
62
80
80
80
79
74
74
24
25
24
24
25
25
25
24
24
24
67
58
51
35
63
59
55
50
48
44
20
19
16
12
18
16
15
13
12
10
2208

2867
2719
2984
3458
2051
2250
2720
2982
1890
1891
2009
4507
8134
24419
2515
5827
7397
29265
3025
3425
2663
2712
2591
1892
2207
2210
2249
2187
2488
2394
1030
2462
2010
3046
1237
1713
1360
1520
1862
1874
2206
2515
3207
4276
2218
2135
1944
2105
2016
2004
2217
3522
6751
19037
2725
2792
3187
3722
3702
4736
235063
3918

37
42
9

12

Table 20: Results on 800-customer problems

29

LNS best known
veh.
cost

80
59
44
25
50
42
32
21
42
32
15
12
10
7
12
10
8
5
10
9
80
78
65
60
80
80
80
78
73
71
24
24
24
23
25
24
25
24
24
24
67
57
50
35
61
58
54
49
47
42
20
18
16
12
18
16
15
13
12
10
2181

39315.92
34370.37
29718.09
21197.65
39046.06
33659.50
27294.19
19570.21
36126.69
30200.86
33816.90
32575.97
25310.53
19506.42
32634.29
27870.80
25077.85
19256.79
30791.77
28265.24
25184.38
26062.17
25918.45
22970.88
25211.22
25164.25
25158.38
25348.45
25541.94
25712.12
11687.06
14358.92
13198.29
13376.82
12329.80
12702.87
11855.86
11482.88
11629.61
11578.58
32268.95
28395.39
24354.36
18241.91
30995.48
28568.61
28164.41
26150.65
24930.70
24271.52
23289.40
21786.62
16586.31
14122.05
20292.92
21088.57
19695.96
19009.33
19003.68
19766.78
1423062.65
48
53
53

veh.

LR1101
LR1102
LR1103
LR1104
LR1105
LR1106
LR1107
LR1108
LR1109
LR11010
LR2101
LR2102
LR2103
LR2104
LR2105
LR2106
LR2107
LR2108
LR2109
LR21010
LC1101
LC1102
LC1103
LC1104
LC1105
LC1106
LC1107
LC1108
LC1109
LC11010
LC2101
LC2102
LC2103
LC2104
LC2105
LC2106
LC2107
LC2108
LC2109
LC21010
LRC1101
LRC1102
LRC1103
LRC1104
LRC1105
LRC1106
LRC1107
LRC1108
LRC1109
LRC11010
LRC2101
LRC2102
LRC2103
LRC2104
LRC2105
LRC2106
LRC2107
LRC21010
Tot.
Avg.
< PB
<= PB
#B

100
80
54
31
64
51
39
29
52
42
19
16
13
10
15
13
11
8
14
12
100
96
85
76
100
101
100
99
93
91
30
32
30
30
31
31
32
30
31
30
84
73
55
41
76
69
65
60
57
51
23
22
19
14
19
18
18
13
2698

Best known
cost
References

57977
52361.61
44890.55
32336.04
58260.68
49697.85
39861.97
31515.87
52282.36
45710.21
45835.55
48817.75
43094.14
32993.09
56010.62
48225.07
38336.76
32493.7
55587.14
47678.69
42488.66
43437.2
42483.61
39613.83
42477.4
42838.39
42854.99
42711.7
42899.1
42243.4
16879.24
17598.6
19198.95
17726
17466.42
17352.7
18131.36
17974.2
17769.6
18249.85
49315.3
45679.5
36570.5
28979.2
51455.4
47014.55
43321.51
42968.34
42549.12
38274.02
36894.98
28019.7
30226.39
25836.7
39344.9
29947.9
31633.3
31361.45
2195755

BVH
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
BVH
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
TS
BVH
BVH
TS
TS
BVH
SAM
LL
TS
TS
TS
SAM
BVH
SAM
BVH
BVH
BVH
BVH
BVH
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
LL
SAM
BVH
SAM
SAM
BVH
SAM

avg.
sol.
57172.54
49937.45
42886.53
31450.33
58138.72
47333.63
38315.35
29674.35
51412.70
45873.80
47201.18
51094.71
38654.94
28821.03
53453.03
46388.49
36506.87
27137.04
52093.74
44815.46
42488.66
43417.56
42589.34
38950.40
42477.41
42838.39
42855.17
42964.24
42614.87
42715.95
16879.24
19210.16
17503.99
19076.31
17149.07
18276.39
19306.15
17266.57
17825.02
18342.21
48997.27
45351.71
35393.15
28013.33
50012.71
44308.41
41395.55
40946.68
39708.07
36184.43
32969.29
29945.79
27201.83
22976.06
31946.46
30362.74
29915.31
30293.97
2129031.74

FULL, Both IA = 0.01
avg.
best
#veh.
sol.
100.0
80.0
54.0
29.0
61.6
51.8
38.2
26.4
51.0
41.0
19.0
15.4
12.0
8.6
14.8
12.4
9.6
7.0
13.0
11.6
100.0
95.8
82.6
74.8
100.0
101.0
100.0
98.0
92.2
90.2
30.0
31.4
30.8
30.2
31.0
31.0
32.0
30.0
31.2
30.2
85.4
73.0
55.4
40.2
76.2
70.2
65.2
61.0
58.0
52.2
23.2
22.2
17.8
12.8
18.8
18.0
17.2
12.2
2677.80

57016.58
49765.70
42681.33
32133.36
59135.86
48637.63
38936.54
29452.32
52223.15
46218.35
45493.36
50925.97
37778.15
29783.60
55497.90
46145.75
38322.91
26631.41
50990.04
46117.94
42488.66
43870.19
42631.11
39443.00
42477.41
42838.39
42854.99
42954.34
42391.98
42435.16
16879.24
19116.33
17940.74
18418.52
17137.53
17217.15
17721.20
17035.24
17667.44
17266.19
48934.66
45272.96
35475.72
27930.03
49816.18
44469.08
41413.16
40590.17
39587.85
36195.00
35073.70
31054.84
28662.28
23611.31
34713.96
29577.50
29822.82
30160.05
2137033.93

best
#veh.

avg.
time
(s)

100
80
54
28
61
50
37
26
50
40
19
15
12
8
14
12
9
7
13
11
100
95
82
74
100
101
100
98
92
90
30
31
30
30
31
31
32
30
31
30
85
73
55
40
76
69
64
60
57
52
22
21
17
12
18
18
17
12
2652

4576
4495
4473
4522
3474
3673
3598
4892
3126
2841
3158
5324
12055
26496
4244
6565
14455
26592
3844
5945
4025
4008
4123
3617
3603
3714
3556
3637
3508
3582
1502
2171
3651
4120
2561
2012
2796
2745
2809
3297
3638
3966
4397
6042
3372
3132
3047
3017
2837
2930
2864
4749
9528
28075
3945
2356
4432
5729
311441
5370

50
54
25

7

Table 21: Results on 1000-customer problems

30

LNS best known
veh.
cost

100
80
54
28
61
50
37
26
50
40
19
15
11
8
14
12
9
7
13
11
100
95
82
74
100
101
100
98
92
90
30
31
30
29
31
31
31
30
31
29
85
73
55
40
76
69
64
60
57
52
22
21
16
12
18
17
17
12
2646

56903.88
49652.10
42124.44
32133.36
59135.86
48637.63
38936.54
29452.32
52223.15
46218.35
45422.58
47824.44
39894.32
28314.95
53209.98
43792.11
36728.20
26278.09
48447.49
44155.66
42488.66
43870.19
42631.11
39443.00
42477.41
42838.39
42854.99
42951.56
42391.98
42435.16
16879.24
18980.98
17772.49
18089.93
17137.53
17198.01
19117.67
17018.63
17565.95
17425.55
48702.83
45135.70
35475.72
27747.04
49816.18
44469.08
41413.16
40590.17
39587.85
36195.00
35073.70
30932.74
28403.51
23083.20
34713.96
31485.26
29639.63
29402.90
2122921.51
51
55
55

